

----

Presace 
I. 
w. 
vi VIL. — Tue Suuswar. 
By Jaues Terr. 
Edited by Franz Boas. 
Puates XIII, XIV. 
CONTENTS. 
Introduction, Historical and Gongrapical Name of the Tribe . . . . . . Habitat «oo 0 ooo Neighbors. . Ce Divisions of the Tribe . . . . . . Dialects . «+ oo. o.oo... 
Characteristics of the Country . . Bands and Villages Ce Tribal Boundaries . . . . . . . Lo... Population. . LL... . Co Migrations and Tntercourse: Sa Mental Traits Lo. o.oo... 
Manufactures. LLL. . Tmplements . Painting Co Preparation of Skins . . . . LL... .. Basketry . . o.oo. oo... Weaving . Lo. LoL... 
House and Household Habitations 
  House Furnishings . . . . . . . . . 
Clothing and Omaments. . . . . . . . . . . . Clothing. «+. Decoration of Clothing... . . . . . LL .. Personal Adoromeat + | | | | |... 
Subsistence . LL. So Varieties and Preparation of Food |. |. | | | 
Hag CLD Fabing. | LL... LL. 
Travel and Transporation; Trade +. © 
Warfie, LLL. FE Weapons of Offence and Defence. . . . . | . Accounts of WarEspeditions . «| | |. | [443]

----

444 
vi 
IX. 
xX. 
XIL 
XIL 
XIV. CONTENTS. 
Games and Pastimes . . . Lo... o.oo... 
Sign Language « «+ o.oo 
Social Organization and Festivals. . . . . . . . . . . . Organization of the Southern Bands . Ce Organization of the Western Part of the Tribe . . . . . . . 
Birth, Childhood, Puberty, Marriage, Death . . . . . . . . Pregoancy. . . . o.oo. . A. Bith . o.oo... Childhood... «o.oo Twins «o.oo... Cee Puberty o.oo ooo Marrige.Castoms _ . . LLL... ...... Customs relating to Women . . . . . . . . .. .... Burial-Customs . . . . . . . 
Religion. Ce 
Conception of the World . . | . . Prayers and Observances. . Festivals o.oo... Guardian Spirits... . . o.oo... Lo... The Soul «o.oo... Shamanism... . . . . . . Prophets... . PE Ethical Concepts and Teaching . . . . . . . . . . 
  Medicine, Charms, Current Beliefs . . . 
Myths ©... Iwodvetary Ce 
. Coyote Tales. . . . RE Coyote and his Son; or, The Story of Kalialit - Fox and Hare; or, The Liberation of the Chinook Wind Coyote and Grisly Bear make the Seasons, and 4h 1 
    Coyote makes Women menstruate . . RE Coyote and his Hosts . . . . . . . . . . .... Coyote and Grisly Bear . . . . . . . . . .... Coyote and the Hunting-Cannibal. . . . . . Coyote and Holxol’p Coyote and Fox . Cee Story of Coyote and Fox quarreling . + . . . . . . Story of Coyotes Daughter; or, r. Coyotes Davgher and her Dogs . . . SL J Coyote and Salmon... . . . | RN Coyote and Wolf. RE . . Story of Coyote and the Swans... . LL... Coyote and the Black Bears. . . . . . . . . . .. Coyote and his Niece +... . . . o.oo... Coyote and the Cannibal Boy . . oe The War of the Four Tribes or of the Four Ques. A Origin of the Chileotin Caion . . . . . . . . ... The Ball . Loo...

----

CONTENTS. 
2. OldOne. . . . . . . Ce Old-One and the Sweat-Howse . ©... . LL... 0ld-One and the Brothers . . . . . . . 3 Tiss and his Brothers. . . . . o.oo... 4 Story of Cava... . Ce 5. Brief Stories of Transformations. Co So of the Moon LL Co Story of the Deer . o.oo... Story of Owl and Chipmunk. The Litle Chief Hare. . . . . . RE Beaver and Porcupine. . + . . . . . — Story of Grasshopper . . Ra. Story of the One Bound and Grasshopper - . . © . | © Story of Tsowa'una . . . Co Story of Bighorn-Sheep and bis Wives . . R— The Woman and the Pelicans . . . . . Story of the Women and Muskrat. . oo Story of Porcupine . . . Ca .. 6. Story of Red-Nose and the Woodpeckers, including the Tale of Bluejay and Tela'na . . . . . . 7. Story of Bluey; or, War between the Birds and Mammals 8. Story of Woodpecker's Marriage; or, Blciys Revenge. o. Story of Tala’ma . « . +o. oo... Ce xo. Story of the Loon . . . . . Ce 1x. The Mammals steal Fire from the Fishes . SL 12. Story of the Tsblent/et's Son . . . . . . . . . .. 13. The Fishes and the Cannibal . . . . . . . . . . . 14. Wolf and Wolverene . . . . . . . Co 15. Wolverene and Fisher. . . Ce 16. Story of Axa'na; or, Marten and Fisher © RN 17. Story of Skunk and Beaver . . . . . . . 18. The Hare and the Grisly Bears 19. Story of Kuligwataxen or the Wren . . . . . . . . . 20. Story of Muskrat . . . . . . . . . 31. Story of Grisly Bear's and Beavers Chideen, ining that of Coyote and the Eggs . . . . . . . oe 22. Story of the Lynx . . . . . Ce 23. Story of Bald-Headed Eagle . R- 24. The Brothers who married the Grisly-Bear Girl .  . . . | 25. The Women who sought for a Husband; or, The Women who marked ge Cafe hi) and Wetouane A 26. Spider and Otter . . . . . . Ce 27. Story of the SalmonBoy . + +... LoL... 28. Grisly Bear's Grandchildren . . . . . . . . . . . . . ag. Story Of BWR . LL. 30 Soy of OWL. Lo 31. Story of Famine or Hunger. . . . . . . . . . . . 32. Story of the Moon and his Wives. . . . . . . . . .. 33 Story of Smamaz o.oo... LL... 34. Story of Xomisst'sest . . LL... LoL... 35. Mosquito and Thunder . . . . . . Lo. . .. . 
 

----

446 
  Xv. CONTENTS. 
36. Story of Kuxkafin . . «o.oo... 37. Story of Hupken . . , . . . o.oo... 38. Dirty-Lad and his Wives . . . o.oo... 39. Story of Ntce/mka and the Giant. . . . . . 40. The Man and the Four Cannibals; or, The Magic “Arrows 41. The Woman who became a Grisly Bear 4. Story of Teotcu/lcd; or, The Hunter who became a Wolf 
43. Story of the Man who married the Grisly Bear . . . 44. The Man who married the Sa‘twen . A 45. The Man and the Dwarfs . 46. The Woman and her Paamour . . + . . . . . 47. The Woman and the Water-Mystery. . . . . 48. The Gambler's Son and the Star-Man . 49. The Gambler's Son and Red-Cap R so. Story of Alame'r. . . . . Cee St. Story of Butcetst’ and Whie.Chief . . . | . . . 52. The Lad and the Cannibal . . . . . . . . . 
Myths of the North Thompson Shuswap . 53 Coyote Tales « «ov oooo aaa Coyote and his Nephew . . © Ce Coyote and Grisly Bear make the Seasons, and Night and Dey Coyote as the Sun... «Lo. Coyote and his Hosts . . . « . . . Coyote and Grouse . . . . +... +. oo Coyote and the Girls . . . . Coyote, the Yellow-Belled Marmots, aad Fox Story of Coyote ad Fox quaeling - +. - Coyote and Salmon . . . . . . . oo. . Coyote and the Cannibal . Coyote snowed in +... oo... Coyote and his Wives . . . . . . . . . . 
54.0dOne. - o.oo 55. The Goat Woman . . . . 56. Skunk and Porcupine . . . . . . . . . . §7. The War with the Sky People. . . . . . . . . $6. Skunk and Badger . . Cee So. Water-Ouzel and the Grisly Bears. . . . . . . . Go. Wren oo... 61. Skunk and Fisher . . . — 62. Red-Headed Woodpecker and his Wives . . . . . 
63. Sa'naz and Seven-Heads . . . . . . . . . . 64. Lhepasken and Lexhekst . . . . . . . . . . 65. The Lads and the Cannibals . . . . . . Z Notes on the Chilcotin Indians. . . . . . . .

----

PREFACE. 
The following description of the Shuswap is the result of studies made 
by myself among the tribe, for the Jesup North Pacific Expedition. At the 
request of Dr. Franz Boas, I made a journey with pack-train in 1900, and 
visited the western and northern bands of Fraser River, spending almost all 
the summer and fall among them. I was previously acquainted with this 
region, having made several hunting and exploring trips through it in 1887, 
1888, and 1892, my journeyings extending far into the Carrier country. 1 
also accompanied Dr. Boas on his visits to all the western Shuswap bands, 
and across the Chilcotin country to Bella Coola in 1897. During the scason 
of 1900 I collected the bulk of my information from several old men in the 
of Canoe Creek and Dog Creek, and especially from a very intelligent 
old man called Sixwilexken, who was born near Big Bar, and in carly days 
had travelled all over the country inhabited by the tribe. He was particularly 
well posted on the history, traditions, and customs of his people, and took 
great interest in relating everything he knew. I returned home via Bonaparte. 
During the summer of 1903 1 made an extended trip by packtrain 
across country to Canim Lake, and thence to North Thompson River, where 
I staid for some time among the Indians on the Red Trees Reserve, returning 
home via Kamloops. On this trip I gathered most of my information from 
George Sisiulix, and other old men of the North Thompson band. In the 
summer of 1904, when returning from a trip among the Okanagon, I visited 
the Indians of Spallumcheen, and, passing along Shuswap Lake to Kamloops 
and Savona, went home by Mamet Lake and Nicola. Thus I visited all 
the bands of the Shuswap, excepting the isolated ones of Upper North 
Thompson River at Jasper House, the Kinbaskets on Columbia River, and 
the Arrow Lake band. and collected more or less information among them. 
It would have been interesting, and perhaps of value, to have visited these 
bands as well; but the time and money required for the undertaking would have about doubled the expenses of the Shuswap expedition. 
  J. A. Tem. 
Spences Bridge, B. C. 
March, 1905. 
[447]

----



----

I. — INTRODUCTION, HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL. 
Name or ThE Trig. — The Indians to be described in this paper are 
called “Shuswap” by the whites. The employees of the Northwest Company, 
who first visited them from the north, generally called them “Atnas,” which 
is a word of Carrier derivation. They were also called “Atnah or Carrier 
Indians’ by Sir Alexander Mackenzie in 1793,! and by Simon Fraser in 1808. 
The former was probably the first white man to meet any of them, and the 
latter was the first white man to explore the northern and western parts of 
their country. This visit is remembered by a very old man, Setse'l by name, 
who was born in the village Peq on Riskie Creek, and was still living at 
Alkali Lake in 1900. He was a small boy when Simon Fraser's party came 
down Fraser River with canoes. Xlo'sem, the Soda Creek chief, accompanied 
the party as guide, and interpreted for them. Kolpapatcinexen® was at that 
time chief of the Canoe Creek band, and Haxkwe'st was a noted war chief and a wealthy man. He had three wives, and was tall, and wore only a 
breech-clout, excepting in the winter-time. Some of the Soda Creek Indians 
were the only Shuswap who had seen white men prior to Fraser's party. In 
many places the people thought the strangers were transformers, mythological 
beings, or cannibals, and consequently were very distrustful of them. Fraser 
gave presents of tobacco, beads, and knives, to almost all the Indians he met. 
The tobacco was black twist, and much stronger than the native tobacco, and 
many men who smoked it became sick. The first whites who reached the 
country from the south named the tribe “Shuswap,” “Shuswhap,” or “Shouswhap.” 
The last-named appellation soon superseded all others. This term is a corrup- 
tion of Suxwapmux, or Seywapmux, the name they apply to themselves, 
and by which they are known to all the neighboring tribes of the interior 
Salish ‘stock, to which they belong. It is said that some of the Cree also 
call them by this name. The Kootenai call them Tlitqatewt/mtrat (“without shirts or trousers ™* or “no shirts,” according to some), because the Shuswap 
bands who are neighbors of the Kootenai often wore robes without any shirts underneath. They were nicknamed ‘poor people” by the other Shuswap. By 
  
! See Voyages from Montreal, on the River Si. Lawrence, through the Continent of North Americ, 1 the Frosen snd Pci Ocean in he Vers 1780 ad 1755 (London, 1500, . 57. "See Journal of a Voyage from the Rocky Mountain to the Fact Cons PP 175 et seq. * The plual affknivey which in the preceding pars of thi volume is sxpreid by the symbol X, i rendered in this Paper by x because the X is difficult to distinguish from the lower-case letter x. 
Sc Bos, in Fith Report of the Commitee on the North-Western Tribes of Canada (Report of the Bish Anociation fr the Advancement of Science, fo 158, 306) 
[449]

----

450 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the Carrier they are called “Etna” and by the Chilcotin “Ennai” which in 
each case means “foreigner.” ! 
Ne 2   
  
     
                           
| 
Kamloops Divii Shuswap Lake Dirision. Arrow Lake Band. D1, Shave Cer and o, Villages Iroquois mixed. +, Former villages E, “Bonaparte Division. area, tertory recently occupied by the Chilcotin, Arca at head of Fraser River, enclosed by broken dole nes mprety hooid y  Ska 
    
+ See A. G. Morice, Who are the Atnas? (American Antiquarian).

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 4st 
Hawrtat. — Their habitat (Fig. 199) is in the interior of British Colum. 
bia, generally speaking between latitudes 50° 30 and 53° north, and from 
Fraser River to the Rocky Mountains. Through this region flow three large 
rivers, — the Fraser, North Thompson, and South Thompson. In their val- 
leys and in those of their tributaries most of the tribes have their homes. 
A detached band live on Upper Columbia River, in the East Kootenay dis- 
trict; and another smaller one, on Lower Arrow Lake, in the West Kootenay 
district. Yet another band, mixed with Cree, live practically east of the Rocky 
Mountains, in the neighborhood of Jasper House, and west to Téte-Jaune Cache.! 
Netcimors. — Their neighbors to the north are the Sekanai and Carrier, 
and on the west the Chilcotin, — all tribes of the Dén or Athapascan stock. 
To the southwest are the Lillooet; and on the south are the Couteau or 
Thompson Indians, and the Okanagon, — all closely related to them. To 
the southeast are the Kootenai. On the east are the Cree, who are of 
Algonquin stock; and a small tribe called the Stonies, who are of Athapascan 
lineage, and related to the Sarcee and Beaver Indians. Also within the north- 
eastern part of the Shuswap hunting-grounds lived until quite lately a small 
band of Iroquois, who seem now to have mostly merged into the mixed Cree and 
Shuswap band inhabiting the country in the neighborhood of Yellow Head Pass 
and cast of there. Most, if not all of the tribes known to the Thompson Indians, were also known to the Shuswap. Their names for the v 
  us peoples are — 
Sekao’lamuy or Skalauilixemuy (“beaver people,” or “people 
    of the beaver country”). . +... . Beavers. Se/lani . . ii Yu'nahena, or Y0nzhana. . . . . . . . .. .. .. Caer in general Steka'lixemus (“people above, or at the tops” i.e. living above the Shuswap on Fraser River) . . . . . . . . . . . Carer of Fraser River. Stkema’ksemu (“people at the end or point; i.e, of the Shuswap territory on Fraser River). . . Carrier of Alexandria, Pesxt/xenem (“dentalia [people],” because the Shuswap got most of their dentalia from this tribe). . . . . . + Chilcotin. Plhoten (a corruption of the Chilcotin name for themselves). siwdimoy © .. Lillooet in general. Tete/lamu (“lake people,” from the Lillooet language) . . . Lillooet of the Lakes. Teugwilut . So... . Lower Lillooet, Lemsia’ (also used by the Okanagon) . . ©... .| The Sulo, or Lower Fraser Sa'tcenkua or S¥tcenko (aso used by the Thompson) . Indians (Coast Salish). Nuakapamuy. «ooo... ©... +... Thompson Indians in general. Niakapamugto'e (“real Niaka/pamus®) . . . . . . . . . Thompson Indians of Thomp- son River, including Lytton. Nkuotamux or Nko'atamux (“people of Kuo't,” a longdeserted village of about 10 houses, about 2 miles below Spences Bridge, on the south side of the river). . . . . . . . . . . Thompson Indians, Spences Bridge division. 
  
© See Mofice, The History of the Northern Interior of British Columbia (Toronto, 1904), pp. 154 and 155.

----

452 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
LoLowa'kamuy. (“people of LoLowdq,” a nearly deserted village about 8 or o miles above Spences Bridge) . . . . . . . Thompson Indians, Nicola di- vision. Staxaiy . . . . . .. ............ Thompson Indians of Fraser River, including the Uta’mqt. Swawalmamus . . . . . . . ... ........ Qknagonin general. Okanckain . . . . . . ............ Okn‘sgon of Okanagon Lake and River. Sats (‘poops of Skala). + + +o - Okanagon next to the Kootenai Sahw/pien . . Soo... . Sabaptin in general whamo or wkemox . . . © . Yakima. Skaisu/tkuamuy or Kai elma Compe of Kailua” [Koo 
tenay River) . . . . . SL... .. Kootemiin general. Stellex or Stel... Lo... ....... Fabows or Kootenai of Koo- tenay Lake. Npownn. . . . . Co ... Stone. Stekweigenemuy (“biack-footed people”) . . . . LL . . . Blacker Seqi‘umuy (fom Kootenai Zutskiau'm') Co... Cre ramo (probably a corruption of Iroquois) Le/matcif or Lematcip (“halfbreed” from the French més, | Iroquois band at Yellow pronounced by the French ofen “mewii”). . . . . . .{ Head Pass. Tenesima. . . oo... 
1 will here also give their names for the whites and other races: — 
St/ma or Sma... ©... Whites in general. Suie/pmu (evidently from Sahaptin suya’p). . . . . . . . American whites Spete’kd “ancients, or mythological beings,” because when first seen they were believed to be the “ancients” retwmed) . . . Spetekie (“real ancients”) . . . . . Lo... Lo. Skwotw16x (“other-side country; i.e. believed to come from the other end of the world, or beyond the Rocky Mountains) - Skwotu/loxemux (“people from the country on the other side”) First whites seen, the employees 
Teemie/melox (“burned or blackened people,” or “burnt country | of the Northwest and Hudson Bay Companies.    
  
people; so named because they were supposed to have come out from under the water in the country of the sun, where it was very hot, and where they were burned and blackened; or because thought to be the offspring of sun and water) Ne/gel (from French) . . Kenkansht’ (said to be a word introduced br half breeds of the fur companies) . . . . . Skomkeme/mps (“lump at back of head,” on account of the cue tied up at the back of the head) . . . . . . . . . .{ Chinese. Tee/namen (from English Chinamen) . . . . . . . . . . Negroes. 
Duwsions or mie Tre. — The Shuswap, like the Thompson Indians, 
are divided into a number of tribal divisions, most of them well recognized. 
These are the following.   
+ See F. Boas, in Fifth Report of the Commitice on the North-Western Tribes of Canada (British Association for the Advancement of Science, 188, p. S06).

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 453 
1. The Stemxulexamux (‘people of Stemxulax’)! those inhabiting the 
valley of Fraser River from High Bar to Soda Creek (including the people 
of Clinton). All or nearly all their villages and reserves, with the exception 
of some near High Bar, are situated on the east side of Fraser River, gener- 
ally a short distance up the valleys of small creeks. Belonging to this divis- 
ion was the band called Tcexwe'pkémus, who formerly inhabited Empire 
Valley and the surrounding country west of Fraser River, but who are now 
nearly extinct, their remnants being settled with the Canoe Creek band. The 
Stemxu/lexamu claim as hunting-grounds the country west of the Fraser for 
over thirty miles back, including some of the feeders of Bridge River, all of 
Big Creek and other creeks emptying into the Fraser, north to Churn Creek. 
This, of course, includes Empire Valley and the Ground-Hog Mountains. 
The country opposite Soda Creek and Williams Lake for some twenty miles 
back is claimed by the people there, and the territory of the Se‘tremuy was also used as hunting-grounds by the bands living opposite them. A little 
hill or mound with a lake or swamp near it, in a locality called Xwalxa'stcen 
(‘plenty of roots”), on a tributary of Bridge River, is looked upon as a per- 
petual boundary-mark showing the junction of the hunting-grounds of the 
Stemxu/lexamuy, Lillooet, and Chilcotin. On the east side of the Fraser they 
claim the Green Timber Plateau back to the Bonaparte beyond Clinton, and extending north by Green Lake to Lac la Hache, and thence north to Ques- 
nel Lake or somewhat beyond. Along this line, however, the division is not 
very well defined. the Stemxulexamuy, Sti¢‘tamuy, and Zaxtcinemux often 
bunting over the same grounds. 1 shall call this division the Fraser River division. Some Indians consider them as forming two groups, — viz, an 
upper and a lower, — the people of each being more closely related within 
themselves. The lower group comprises the bands from High Bar to Dog 
Creek; and the upper group, those above Dog Creek. 
2. The Se'tzemux or Se'tiomux (‘people of Setr). This seems to have 
been a name for the district around Chilcotin River, below the cadon. The 
Indian name of Lillooet is also Set. or Setr, and both places correspond in being situated close below a cafon through which a swift stream flows. This 
division lived west of the Fraser, from about Churn Creek to beyond Riskie 
Creek; their main villages being situated at the foot of the caion of Chil- 
cotin River. They claimed the country back to within a short distance of 
Hanceville, — some say to a place called Pesta’t, near the junction of Deer 
Creek and Chileotin River, — and on the north and south hunted over part 
of the same grounds used by the Fraser River division. At the crossing of 
the Hanceville trail over Deer or Big Creek is one of their boundary-marks, 
in the shape of two bowlders, called the “Coyote’s Sweat-Houses,” which   
+ lax, or xwldx, means “country;” and siem secs to have some connection with the names Statlemox, Lemsit, Stasai'ug, Set, — all names along Fraser River. 
 

----

454 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
defines the eastern limits of the Chilcotin hunting-grounds in those parts 
(Fig. 200). All that now remains of the Se'tiemuy are one or two families 
who have a reservation near the mouth of Chilcotin River on the south side, and a very few old people and their descendants settled among their 
friends at Alkali Lake. I shall refer to them as the Cadon division. 
3. The Stictamux (‘interior 
people’). This division inhabits 
the interior of the plateau be- 
tween Fraser and North Thomp- 
son Rivers, with headquarters near Canoe or Canim Lake. 
Most Indians classed the Lac 
Ia Hache people in this division. 
They fished and hunted around 
the lakes of the plateau, and 
ranged very little south, east, 
[P— or west, because of their prox 
imity to the grounds of other 
divisions. To the north, however, they hunted around the eastern parts of 
Horsefly and Quesnel Lakes, the Clearwater Lakes, and up into the Caribou 
Mountains opposite the Yellow Head Pass. I shall call this people the Lake 
division. 4 The Texqa'kallt or Texq¥kalltemux (‘people of the upper reaches 
or top’). These are the people of the whole North Thompson region. Many 
Indians subdivide them into two bands, — (1) the Nsimpxemuyx (‘people of 
North Thompson River’ [nsimpx]), those who live on the lower part, with 
headquarters at the Red Trees Reserve, about fifty miles above the mouth 
of the river; and (2) the Texqakallt or Texqakallti'e (‘people of upper reaches 
proper’) or Xexkalllt (‘those at the top’), those almost completely nomadic 
Indians who live nearly in the heart of the Rocky Mountains, around the head waters of North Thompson River, the Yellow Head Pass, and Jasper 
House. 1 shall name them the Upper North Thompson band; and the whole 
division, the North Thompson division. On the west their hunting-grounds 
are co-extensive with those of the Lake division, while east and north they 
extend along Adams Lake, include Canoe River, part of the Big Bend of the Columbia, part of the Rocky Mountain region (around the head of the 
Athabasca), and the Upper Fraser country north towards the head of Smoky 
River nearly to latitude 54°. At the present day most of the Upper North 
Thompson band are mixed a great deal with Iroquois and Cree. I have not 
visited them, although I met some individuals of them, and I cannot say to 
what extent the Shuswap language is spoken among them. Those I met spoke 
Shuswap, but were also proficient in Cree, and understood a good deal of   
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 455 
Canadian French. The most of these mixed people are now located in the 
vicinity of Jasper House, east of the Rocky Mountains: and although through 
long years of intermarriage (principally with Shuswap women) the Iroquois 
and Cree of that region must be largely Shuswap in blood, I cannot say 
definitely which language or which blood has the ascendancy. 1 am of the 
opinion that the largest element of their blood is Shuswap, but that Cree is 
probably the language most spoken. However, this is only an opinion, and 
1 am not sure about it. I have assigned this piece of country on the map 
to the Shuswap: and from the present state of our knowledge regarding these 
people, they are probably as much entitled to it as either the Iroquois or 
Cree. This band are often called “Rocky Mountain Shuswap” by the whites; 
and possibly “Rocky Mountain band” might be a preferable title for them, instead of ‘Upper North Thompson band.” Belonging originally to this divis- 
fon is the band of Shuswap located on Upper Columbia River near Lake 
Windermere. They are called from the name of a former chief “Kenpé'sqet's children” by the other Shuswap; to the whites they are known as the Kin- 
baskets, or Kootenai Shuswap. Their hunting-country extends on both sides 
of the Columbia, north to beyond Golden. 1 shall refer to them as the Kin- 
baskets. They have intermarried frequently with the Kootenai. 5. The Sxsté/llnemux (‘people of Sxstélln”). These comprise the Indians 
on the Upper South Thompson, Shuswap Lake, and Spallumcheen River. 
They hunt south along Salmon River, north on Adams Lake to the Columbia 
above Revelstoke, and cast around Mabel and Sugar Lakes to Upper Arrow 
Lake. Sometimes they hunted even beyond the latter in the mountains east 
of Lardeau and Nakusp. It seems the Arrow Lakes were more or less dis- 
puted ground, a band of Okanagon in Washington claiming them almost to 
as far north as Revelstoke. On the whole, however, they seem to have been 
more frequently occupied and utilized by the Shuswap. I shall call these 
people the Shuswap Lake division. Belonging originally to this division, or 
at least having greatest affinity to it, is the small band of Shuswap located 
on Lower Arrow Lake, where they have a reserve, and hunt the country as 
far north as Revelstoke, and as far south as the junction of Kootenay River 
with the Columbia. They may be called the Arrow. Lake band. 
6. The Stkamlulepsemux (‘people of the confluence; namely, of North 
and South Thompson Rivers); also sometimes called Sexwapmux's’s (‘Shuswap 
proper’). There seems to be some rivalry for this name, as some Indians 
claim it for the Shuswap Lake band, and some members of the lower group 
of the Fraser River division say it is most applicable to them. These are 
the people of Kamloops and of Savona. They hunt in the country south to 
Stump Lake, in all the territory around Kamloops Lake, and along part of the South and main Thompson Rivers. Northwards they claim all Deadman’ 
Creek, some of the head waters of the Bonaparte, and the country on each

----

456 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
side of the North Thompson for some fifteen miles or more (some say to 
near Louis Creek). I shall call them the Kamloops division. 
7. Zaxtei'nemuy (‘people of the low valley, or shore,” because their valleys 
are lower than those occupied by the other Shuswap). This division claims 
the valley of the Bonaparte River to near Asheroft on the main Thompson, 
Cache Creek, Loon Lake, the lower part of Hat Creek, through Marble Cafion 
to Pavilion, and both sides of Fraser River near there. | shall name them the Bonaparte division. To them belong the band formerly inhabiting Thomp- 
son River between Savona and Ashcroft. 
Duacers. — The differences in dialect between the several divisions of the Shuswap are very slight, especially in so far as grammatical structure and 
vocabulary are concerned. The chief differences are those of accent, intona- 
tion, and pronunciation. The main body of the tribe, consisting of the Kam- 
loops, Bonaparte, and Fraser River divisions, speak practically the same dialect. 
The Lake and North Thompson divisions speak almost alike, and differ 
slightly from the main group. The Shuswap Lake division differs the most, 
these people having a *heavy,” labored mode of utterance, and their speech 
sounds jerky and guttural in comparison with that of other Shuswap. The 
Thompson is considered the nearest related language. 
CharacterisTics oF THE Country. — Wood, water, and grass are abundant 
in almost every part of the Shuswap country. As the Kamloops and Bona- 
parte divisions live within the *bunch-grass country’ or the “dry belt’ of British 
Columbia, their habitat partakes of the semi-arid features of that region, and 
in aspect and climate is practically the same as the country of the Upper 
Thompson. These characteristics also extend up the valley of Fraser River 
to a little beyond the mouth of Chilcotin River. The mountains west of 
Fraser River are very high near the confines of the Lillooet country, where 
they seem to form spurs of the Coast Range; but farther north they gradually 
assume a lower and more open aspect, until near the Chileotin valley they die away into rolling hills and more or less open plains. Beyond there the 
country assumes more the nature of a forested plateau. The country on the 
opposite side of Fraser River, east to North Thompson River, consists mostly 
of a great rolling plateau, more or less densely wooded, and containing many 
lakes, swamps, and grassy openings. On the east side of North Thompson 
River the country is generally rough and mountainous, and these characteristics 
increase northwards, and castwards towards the Rocky Mountain Range. 
Around the upper part of Shuswap Lake, Lower Spallumcheen, Canoe River, 
and the Big Bend of the Columbia, the timber is usually quite dense, and 
the climate wet. From the Bonaparte and Kamloops districts, both in a 
northerly and an easterly direction, the snowfall gradually increases, grass 
becomes scarcer, and the winters are much colder and longer. The larger 
valleys are at elevations of from 270 to 750 metres above scalevel, and the

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 457 
plateaus average from 1000 to 1300 metres. The timberline is generally 
at an altitude of from 1800 to 2100 metres, and the mountains range from 
2100 to 4500 metres in height. The timber consists principally of yellow pine 
(in the low, arid valleys), Douglas fir (scarce towards the north), Engelmann 
spruce (chiefly on the higher plateaus), black pine (mostly on the lower pla- 
teaus). Hemlock, cedar, yew, balsam, and white pine are found only in the 
eastern part of the country, particularly in the Shuswap Lake region. Tamarack 
is confined to the southeast, and white-barked pine (P. albicautis) chiefly to 
the higher hills in the west. Birch, alder, maple, aspen, poplar, and willow 
are found along the banks of nearly all the streams, lakes, and springs. 
BaNDs AND ViLLAGEs. — The people of all the tribal divisions are further 
divided into a number of bands wintering in certain definite localities, with 
headquarters at a principal village. These bands, although in olden times 
sopewhat better defined than those of the Thompson Indians, were not so 
well marked fifty years ago as now. This was owing to the far greater 
number of small villages existing at that time. The inhabitants of those 
situated at equal distances from two central villages or headquarters of differ- 
ent bands sometimes afiliated with one band, sometimes with the other. 
Besides, the small wintering-places were frequently changed, and even the main locality or village of a band would have more families one winter, and 
less another. Some families were more nomadic than others, and each band 
would have people from neighboring villages living with them every winter. 
Yet, on the whole, cach band was composed of a group of families closely 
related among themselves, who generally wintered within a definite locality, at or within a few miles of a larger village or centre. At the present day 
the several bands and their reserves are well defined by arbitrary boundaries, 
recognized by the Indians themselves and also by the Indian Department. 
The bands of the Shuswap, and their principal villages (past and present), 
are enumerated here. The list comprises all the recognized bands that existed 
from fifty-five to sixty years ago. The numbered ones continue to exist. 
FRASER RIVER DIVISION, 
Band, Principal Village or Headquarters. 
1. Soda Creek band, or “people of Hats?” . . . . . . . Hatsu? or Hatsu! Buckskin Creek band, or “people of Teuskegoa/nk", or “people of Axqomait” (Buckskin Creek). . . . . . . Teuxkeswa/nk.?   
+ Hats], on the east side of Fraser River, a little below the town of Soda Creek, and about 165 miles north of Asherof, via the Caribou wagon-roud. They have reserves and a few houses on Deep Creek aod at Mud Lake. ‘This is the most northerly band of the Shuswap on Fraser River. The net band, 18 miles above, at Alexandria, are Carrer mixed with Shuswap and Chilcoin, This was a numerous band. Formerly their winter houses extended in groups along the cast side of the river, north more than halfway to Alexandria. Some of them also wintered along Deep Creek and on the west side of Fraser River. 0n Buckskin Creek, west side of Fraser River, & few miles south of Soda Creek. This band was exters minated by smallpox. A very few descendants ace among the Soda Creek people.

----

458 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Principal Village or 
  Headguarters. 2. Williams Lake or Sugar-Cane band, or “people of Skold/ten’ (Williams Lake), or “people of Eka’kaike” (place near Williams Lake). . . . . . . . . . . .. ... Pelcokicote'tcn.! 3 Alkali Lake band . . . . ©... Skatt or Squitd 4 Dog Creek band, or “people of the dep hollow’ || Ra'diem or Raut (*desp’)3 5. Canoe Creek band . . ©... Teawa’x (fereek) Empire Valley band (Toegve's pam, perl of he pillar hollow”) . .. Teeyweptem or Teexit'piem.t 
  Big Bar band, or “people of Steka’uz,” or “people of the little hanging bridge” (from stoxala’losem, meaning “little bridge,” or possibly “hanging down wail”) . . . . . . Steka'uz? 6. High Bar band (Eenlena‘itmuy, “people of Eentenaiten,” the name of their present village ; also called “people of the place where the trail goes down” (fom Stlepta’urten, “place where trail goes down,” the name of the creck just north of Kelly Creek) . . . . . ©. Eenkenaliten] 7. Clinton band, or “people of the white earth place,” or “people of the lake” (fom Pa’zulkua, the name of Kelly Lak). «eee eae ao... Pehibqr® 
lu the Willams Lake vally, cas of Fraser River, + short distance below the 150-ile post (fom Lillooet, and about 140 miles norh of Ashcroft. This was « large band. Formerly they lived in seven villages, and bad, besides, other winter camps. They lived principally around Willams Lake, but some winered slong Fraser River down to near Chimney Creck, and others up the San Jos valley to Lac Ia Hache. + Alte north of Alkali Lake, cast of Fraser River, abot 116 miles fom Ashcroft. Some of the band. used to winter along Fraser River as far north as Chimney Creek, and otbers lived wes of the Fraser, at the mouth of Chileon River. Some Indians las the ltr with the Caon division (ee Caion division). +"The name of the lower part of Dog Creek valley, where most of them formerly bad thelr homes. Their headquarters is sell here. on a reserve a litte above Dog Creek Post.Offce, about three miles from the mouth of the creck (on the cas side of Fraser River) and about a hundred miles from Ashcrof. This was once & con- siderable band, some of hem wintering in the Fraser vally, They were almost exterminated by smalls in 1862 or 1863. “The name of Canoe Cresk, along which most of them wintered in a number of small groups. Some of them aso wintered along Fraser River from opposite Chum Creek down to Crow's Ba, and in 8 soll valley leading fom Fraser River to Canoe Creek. At the present day thee main village is on Canoe Crock, 3 milks or 50 fom the mouth, and about $0 miles from Asheroft + This name is sid to mean “hollow or dale with something stuck up in it" — pila or peak, — the name applied to the lower part of Lone Cabin Crock, on the west side of Frsser River, few miles below the mouth of Canoe Creck, where some of this band wed to winter. Other portions of th band win Valley snd slong the west side of Fraser River, north to Chara Creek, snd. south about halfwsy to Big Bar. A sumer of ths band did not use underground houses, but wincred in ents. They were greatly reduced in numbers Ly a warparty of Lilloct who, about 1835, massacred a large camp of them wintering at the Red Butte, near Empire Valley, and again by smallpox in 1862. The remnants of them seuled with the Canoe Creek band. This band was closely related. to the Canoe Creek people. “This same may posibly mean “closedin tril © The place was the headgariers of his band, near the mouth of Big Bar Creek. They lived principally fo the valley of the creek, and along both sides of Frise River for some mile below. On the west side of the Fraser they extended up. several mile, many of them living around the mouth of Big Crock or Watson Bar Creek. They were st one time very numerous. A fw of her descendants are now among. the Canoe Creck and High Dar bunds, A couple of families tl make their homes on Big Bar Creek, bu they are now cased wih the High Bar band. + They live on the cast side of Fraser River, about tweaty-five miles or more orhwest of Clinton. They have Howse and reserve on both sides of Fraser River, This band was very numerous in former mes, and occupied both sides of Fraser River from the cones of the Big Bar band down to near the mouth of Kelly Creek. A large number of them formerly wintered on the creek north of Kelly Creek. This band was closely related to the Big Bar band. + This name means “white car place” and is just west of the town. of Clinton. at the junction of the Lillooet and Caribou wagon-roads, sbost 33 miles north of Ashcroft. This band lives in 8 modern locaton, hardiey 
    
  
 

----

TET, THE. SHUSWAP. 459 
Tue CARON Divisiox. 
Band. Principal Village or Headquartes. Riskie Creek band, or “people of the white,” or people of Amusing” ox Sgenyls of Smo Gin Sisavap sms of Riskie Creek) . . . . North Caton bund, or “pele of the canon, or “people of 1” (probably “below or at the entrance of a cafion”), or pari of Kwo'mesken,” or “people of Snaka'in,” — the names of their principal chiefs. . . . . . . . . Smhaxalaus (“bridge”)? South Canon band, or “people of the rafion,” or “people of Set.” or peopl of Cuxlelly” (the name of hee principal chief)... . S'nhaxel#’us (“bridge”)? Chilcotin Mouth band, or *people of Texhoilu/ps" + Texhoilu/ps.t Peq (“white”)! 
      Tux LAKE Divisiox. 
Band. 
Lac la Hache band, or “people of Hatti/nien or Hatlnten (the name of Lac la Hache). . . . . . . . . . . Hawi'oten® or Hauli‘nten. 
any of them wintering here before 1865. They are the remnants of a very numerous band formerly living from Kelly Lake to Fraser River, with headquarters on Kelly Creek nearly 2 miles below Pear Lake. Here are the remains of fully fy underground houses in one group, and over a hundred caches or cellars. Some of these houses ave. not been inhabited for a long time, as thre are frees fom 70 cm. 10 100 cm. in diameter growing in the middle of some of them. There must be some large graveyards near here, but 1 saw no traces of them. The people of this band were very closely related to the High Bar band, and some Indians class them 1s ane. The people of Big Far, High Bar, and Clinton bands were very closely related among themselves, and were looked upon practically as one people. Another group-closely related amon themselves, although not in the same. degree 2s the fst named, were the Empire Valley, Canoe Creek, and Dog Creek bands, who collectively are said to have been more closely related to the first-named or southern group than (0 the bands father north. These six bands formed. the lower group of the Fraser River people. The Alkali Lake band was very closely related to the whole Caon division, forming with them a group by themselves. Collectively they were much more closely related 10 the northern bands than to the southern, and therefore, with the Williams Lake, Buckskin Creek, and Soda Creek bands, may be chased as forming the upper group of Fraser River. The last three bands were elated within thems. selves, although perhaps not to the same extent 3s the bands forming some of the other groups. + This band lived on Riskie Creek, a small stream a few miles north of the mouth of Chikotin River, and was practically exterminated by smallos in 1863, the few survivors seuling mong the Alkali Lake people. Some time afer the Shuswap ceased to reside here, a band of Chilcotin commenced to resort there, and obtained. from the Government the grant of a reserve, upon which they now reside. +n the non side of Chilotin River, near the foot of the cao, and ssid to be about 10 miles rors the mouth of the river. A large bridge spanned the river here, and the village was situated clos to the north end. of it. The people were almost exterminated by smallpox in 1862. Some of the survivors removed to Alkali Lake; and others, who had close relatives among the Chikotin, settled with the Anshem band of that tribe, Their villsge was often caled “Kwo'mesken's Village.” + On the south side of Chilotin River, near the south end of the bridge, and just opposite the north village. This ville was ofien called “Coxalelly's Village,” from the name of thei head chief, The people bere shared the fate of the North Caon band. the few survivors of the suall-pox epidemic setling with the Alkali band. « This name has some connection with “confluence,” meaning perhaps “srsight confucnce.” The village was near the mouth of Chilcotin River, Here most of the pecple lived, but some of them also wintered along the west side of Fraser River for several miles, principally south of Chilcotin River. One or two families tl live around here, where they have. reserve, but are now clawed with the Alkali Lake band. Joe Kalas ix their chief man. The people of ths band were also nearly all killed off by an epidemic of small.pox. Many Indians clas this band with the Alkali Lake people, so hat it may not be correc {0 assign them to the Caon division. Some Indians, however, aver that they were the se as the South Calon band. + + "These people wintered in litle groups of two or three funilics cach, slong the shores of Lac Ia Hache and on some crocks, principally south of i. One or two families stl lve part of the year around here; but they   
  
  
    
 

----

460 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Principal Village or . Headquarters. 8. Canim Lake band, or “people of Tsqa'syen” (which seems 0 mean “to strike one stone on another”), or “people of the little swan” (from pespakemi‘mex, “little swan,” the name of a place about 6 miles down Canim Lake, on the south side)... . . FI .. Tsqa/sgen. Green Timber band, or “pepe of Pelsisokomu's” (fon he mame of a fish). . . . . . .. ... ... . Pelstsokomu's? 
  North THowPsoN Division. 
Band. 
9: Upp Thompson ban, or “people ofthe upper reaches” or “those at the top”. . . . . . . . Pesskala’lten (“salmon place”).8 x0. Lower North Thompson band, or “people of the red trees,” 4 “ys of Who Go's 4% ooh Tisgron River) «ooo. LL. Teoquoeqwallk (“red trees”) The Kinbaskets or “children or people of Kempt (ihe name of their original chief). . . . . S — 
  
sce now classed, it seems, with the Willams Lake people. Some of this band never used snderground houses. In recent ties this band has becn desiguated by the southern Shuswap as “people of the axe,” 8 name probably derived from the modern name of the lake. + They lived a lite cat of Canim or Canoe Lake, and abort 20 miles eat of Bridge Creek, on the Caribou Road, sbont 64 miles north of Clinton. A number of this band wintered in small groups around Canim Lake, the valley of Bridge Creck, Hore Lake, and other spots. Several families of this band always wintered in lodges, The whole band now live in 4 village bout 4 miles shove the bead of Canim Lake, at Trqu'syen. Formerly the band had three principal village, the chief of which was Pespekemi‘mex; the second was at or near the site of their present village: and the third was about 8 miles west of it, on the trail to Bridge Creek, at 2 place called Pelt’ Jaxkn. A few of the Canim Lake band used to winter on Mahood Lake. AC the present day they keep canoes on both lakes for the purposes of traveling and fing. The native name of Canim Lake i Kolvla. Members of the Canim Lake band sometimes went as far north as Quesnel Lake, where they hunted, trapped, and fished. To the cast they frequented Clearwater River from nea its mouth right north to it source beyond Clearwater Lake. Their hunting.country was formerly very protic in caribou and bear. Rabbits and lyne were also very abundant. Deer summered in large numbers within. the territory of the Canim Lake people, but migrated every fal, only a very few wintering in low places along the shores of Mahood Lake and the Lower Clearwater, The Lac ia Hache and Canim Lake bands were more migratory than the bands belonging to Fraser River, The Canim Lake band inter- married more with the North Thompson people than with the Fraser River people. * This is a lake near the head of Bonaparte River, where most of this hand wintered. Five or more kinds of fish were very abundsnt here. The band is now extinct; a very few descendants are among the Canim Lake people. Most of the band wintered in lodges, and underground hoses were sldom made. 5 This band was numerous at one time, bat had. it secs, no main village, the people wintering in groups of + few families along Upper North Thompson River, north from above Lite Fort, but with a centre at Pesska- ten. They were very nomadic, and a number of families lived most of the time beyond North Thompson River, at the bead of Fraser River, and cast through the Rocky Mountain to Jasper House, Of late years there seems to Bave been a concentration of the people around the later place. A good many of tis band wintered in lodges. “This band ia not within any agency, and appears to have no reserves. They are mixed a great deal with Cree and Iroquois; and the number of seal Shuswap, or those habitually spesking the Shuswap language, is uncertain, "About 50 miles from Kamloops, on the east bank of North Thompson River. Formerly this band wintered in sll groups of from one to four underground hoses on both sides of North Thompson River (but principally on the cast bank) from Little Fort down to sbout 20 miles shave Karloops. They have now ll been gathered on one reserve at Teoqtoequa’lk. +"This band live on reserves nearly appasite the month of Toby Creek, on the right bask of Columbia River, not fr from the outlet of Lower Columbia or Salmon Lake, They lived for many years in a more or les nomadic sate, wintering snd ranging in the Columbia valley, chiefly between Golden and Windermere. The ancestors of these people belonged mastly to the Upper North Thompson band. It seems, however, that some of them belonged othe Lower North Thompson band, aad few to the Adams Lake and Shuswap Lake bands. 
   

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 461 
Tie BosarARTE Divisiox. 
Ban. Principal Village or Headquarters. 12. Pavilion band, or “people of the brown or burnt-like ground” Skwaliidx (probably “burned ground” or “brown ground”)! 13. Bonaparte River band, or “people of Sloxta’us” (the Indian name of Bonaparte River and valley). Tt may mean “clear or shallow way or river”. . . . . . +... . . Nhoxiilen? Main Thompson band? (Snkodtkuamuy, “people of the one ner; from Snkoitkwa, the one river,” the Shuswap name of the main Thompson River). + « . . . . . - 
Tie Kauioors Divisiox. 
Band. 
14. The Savona, or Deadman’s Creek band, or “people of the head waters or sources” (fom sqemqai’n, “head, op, or 
source,” the Indian name of Savona, because the main Thompson leaves the lake here) . . . ©... Sketski‘tessten or Stskitcestent 15. Kamloops band, or *people of the confluence”. . . . . Stkamlwleps or Kamlu'ps (Scon- fuence”).¢ 
SHUSWAP Lakk DIVISION. 
Band. 
16. South Thompson band, or “people of Halu”. . . . . Hald/ut$ 17. Adams Lake band,” or “people of Sxste/lin.” which seems to be the name for Adams Lake or some place at or BATH. eee — 
  
+ On the north side of Pavilion Creek, east of Fraser River, about 23 miles northeast of Lillooet. Some of their reserves are located on the west side of Fraser River, and a few funilies live south of Pavilion in the Marble Cation. Formerly some of this band wintered along the east side of Fraser River to within a short distance of La Fontaine. This band is nearest to the Lillooet, a village of the later being at La Fontaine, 14 miles away. 2 On the west side of Bonaparte River, about 10 miles from its mouth. Some of this band live on reserves on Lower Hat Creek, and they also have reserves at Loon Lake and on Thompson River. * These people lived along both sides of the main Thompson River, principally on the north side, from above Pennies to below Comwals. They are now extinct, the remnants of thers having settled with the Bonaparte’ band, and a few with the Savona people, They lived in small groups, like the North Thompson people, and their centre seems, to have been litle above Ashcroft. Their extinction was largely caused by epidemics. “4 Possibly this means “arrivingplace.” IL is on Deadman's Creek, a few miles back from Savons, on the north side of Thompson River. Formerly some of these people wintered along both sides of Kamloops Lake, more than halfway up, and some others on the river below the outlet of the lake down to a litle sbove Pearies. + At the confuence, between the mouths of the North and South Thompson Rivers, opposite the town of Kamloops. Formerly many of this band wintered along both sides of North and South Thompson Rivers for several miles up, and down Kamloops Lake a short distance. © On the north side of South Thompson River, about 3 or 4 miles below the outlet of Little Shuswap Lake, about 31 miles cast of Kamloops. Formerly these people wintered from near the lower end of the lake, along both sides of South Thompson River, as far west a Ducks. Their main grounds seem 10 have been, howener, on South Thompson River from 3 to 6 or more miles below the foot of Little Shuswap Lake. 7 Most of this band formerly wintered at the outlet and around the lower part of Adams Lake. Some of them passed part of the year, and occasionally wintered, on Great and Little Shuswap Lakes. At the present day most of them live at the foot of Little Shuswap Lake, about 35 miles east of Kamloops, where they have reserves. They also have reserves on Adams Lake. 
     

----

462 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Principal Village or Headquarters. 18. Shuswap Lake band, or “people of Syoteame/Ip” (the name of a place on Salmon Arm, where they have a village) . Kwi‘ut.! 19. Spallumacheen band, or “people of the flat-banked or prairie- banked river”... . Lo... .. ..... Splemicin (“fat or prairie shore”)? 20. Amow Lake band® . LL. LLL... LLL - 
Trial Bounparies. — So far as tradition goes, the tribal boundaries 
have been nearly the same as at the present day. About 1860, or later, a 
number of families wintered on Fraser River several miles north of the present 
northernmost village of Soda Creek; but as these places were within the pres- 
ent recognized hunting-grounds, and have not been occupied by any alien 
people, the extinction or withdrawal of the people from these places does not 
mark any contraction of the tribal territory. A large part of the old hunting- 
grounds in Caribou and north of the head of Fraser River are hardly ever 
used now, owing to the decrease in the numbers of the tribe and to the 
change in manner of living. Neither did the settlement of the Kinbaskets 
on the Upper Columbia really mark any change or extension of the tribal 
boundaries, as that region was hunted over more or less by Shuswap parties 
as far back as tradition goes. Since the extinction of the Cafon division, 
and other bands formerly inhabiting the west side of Fraser River, and since 
the introduction of white man’s laws which prevent any retaliation, the Chil- 
cotin have gradually encroached on these grounds, and a band of them have 
settled permanently on Riskie Creek, where the Government has given them 
a reserve. Nevertheless the Shuswap still claim and use their old hunting- 
grounds in this region. 
South of Chilcotin River, the Chilcotin continue to encroach on the terri 
tory of the Shuswap, although they do not claim to own it, and now often 
hunt in sight of Fraser River. The Shuswap harbor considerable ill-fecling 
against these Chilcotin hunting-parties, who are looked upon as poachers, who, 
after destroying most of the game in their own country, now seek to ruin 
the Shuswap hunting-grounds as well. Within the last ten years the Stone 
Chilcotin, who have killed off most of the deer in their own country, have 
! At the head of Lite Shuswap Lake, about 42 miles ast of Kamloops. This band formerly lived along Great Shuswap Lake from the head of Litle Shuswap Lake, and farther to the east, wintering in 8 nomber of places, At the present day they live mosdly at the head of the Litle Lake and at Salmon Arm, sbout 63 miles cast of Kamloops, where they have reserves. The last-named three bands were very closely related to one another. * This seems to be a name for the more or less open part of the Spallumcheen valley near Enderby. The present village of the band is situated about 4 mile and a half south of Enderby, on the west side of the river. They have reserves bere sad on Salmon River. Their chief wintering-point in early days seems 10 have been near their present headquarters. This band is related rather closely to the Shuswap Lake band, + Since 1902 this bend has had a reserve on the west side of Lower Arrow Lake, where they make their rs. Formerly; they roamed along Columbia River between Revelstoke and the American boundary-line, and fishing; and they do even now in some measure. These people are mixed with Kootenai to some extent, Formerly, it seems, they were closely related to the Spallumeheen band. 
      
    

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 463 
been spending the greater part of the summer and fall on the Shuswap hunt- 
ing-grounds, gradually extending their range farther south, until now they 
often appear at Big Bar. 
The only real change in the tribal boundaries seems to have been along 
Fraser and Thompson Rivers. On the former river, according to tradition, 
the Shuswap, at one time long ago, extended along the east side, nearly or 
quite as far down as opposite the present town of Lillooet. This branch of 
the tribe have gradually been absorbed by the Lillooet, their descend: 
ants forming fully one-half of the present Fountain band of that tribe. 
In this direction, therefore, the tribal boundaries have shrunk at least fifteen 
miles. On the main Thompson River a band of the Bonaparte division 
extended chiefly on the north side as far west as eight or more miles below 
Asheroft. These people have partly been absorbed by the Thompson River 
Indians, who now occupy the country up to Ashcroft, and beyond it to 
Pennies on the south side of the river. 
" Poruiatiox. — The population of the tribe is somewhat more than 
that of the Thompson Indians, but is now probably less than one-third of 
what it was fifty years ago. Smallpox epidemics have been the prime cause 
of this decrease. This disease has visited portions of the tribe twice; and 
in 1862 and 1863 it was especially severe, wiping out whole villages. At 
that time the Cafion division, and other bands living on the west side of 
Fraser River, contracted the discase from the Chilcotin, and were practically 
exterminated. Spreading east across Fraser River, it ran through most of 
the other Shuswap bands, making great havoc. The Shuswap transmitted it 
to the Thompson, and probably also to the Lillooet, and the latter espe- 
cially succumbed in great numbers. It also spread north and decimated the 
Lower Carrier. Of one of their bands which inhabited Bear Lake in the 
Caribou Mountains, only one or two persons survived. The Chilcotin, who themselves suffered severely, seem to have contracted the disease from the Bella Coola Indians of the coast! Small-pox has not devastated the Shuswap 
territory since; but other causes have had a similar effect, although slower 
in their operation. The settlement of the country by the whites, and the 
consequent change in the manner of living of the Indians, with the attendant 
introduction of new laws, of whiskey, of venereal and other diseases, seem 
to have helped to weaken the race, and to have hastened their decrease. 
Epidemics, such as measles, scarlatina, whooping-cough, and influenza, have 
sometimes been very severe, and every few years have killed off very many 
children. As with the Thompson, births have been frequent; but the 
mortality among children has been so great, that in most bands very few 
have lived to be adults. Tuberculosis has carried off a good many of the 
  
+ See Morice, History of Northern British Columbin, pp. 300, 301.

----

464 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
younger adults of late years, but this disease does not seem to be quite so frequent now. Those bands living closest to the principal settlements of the 
whites have decreased the most. Of late some bands have almost held their 
own. The birthrate seems to have risen, or the infant mortality has de- 
creased. It may be of interest here to compare the population of the present 
bands of the tribe, taken from the Reports of the Indian Department of 
Canada for 1903 and 1906, with an estimate of the population of all the 
bands about 1850, as furnished by an intelligent old Indian, who is particularly 
well posted on all matters concerning his people, and who had travelled 
extensively among almost all the bands of the tribe. 
      
  
  
  
  
  r— Rervans or Lox Derr. Bao. PoruLmion aout 8s. 1903. 1906. 
Fraser River Division. 
. Soda Creek band . . . . . . . 00 Is 8 Buckskin Creck band | |. . pe z = =. Willams Lake band . . . . . wo | 15s 3. Alkali Lake band... LL JR ed + Dog Creek baad... . | bad jo 20 5. Canoe Creek band. . . . . . . 250 6 163 Empire Valley band . | . . . . . toot - - Big Bar band . . LL. = z 6. High Bar band... os 5 = 7. Clinton (or Kellys Creek) band . © = 
Towl. . . . ..| aos | 669 596 
Caton Division's 
Risk Crock band. . . . . . . . 100 - - 
North Caton band. . |. . . . 200 - z 
South Caton band. ©... . 300 - — Chicorin Mouth band. +. . 100 — — 
Toul. LL... 700 = =                     
+ Remnots settled at Soda Creek, + Augmented after 1863 by the survivors of the Cason division. 3 Number probably too low. «The Empire Valley bend has been on the decline since the massacre by the Lillooet. About 1810 or 1830 they may have numbered from 250 to 300. After 1863 the remnants settled at Canoe Creek. + Remnants settled at High Bar, & few at Canoe Creek. 4 See Footnote 2. A few people of the North Cafion band settled among the Chilcotin.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 465 
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  Estep ReruRNs or INpiaN Derr. 
Baxo. PoruLATION ABOUT) 
1850. 1903. 1906. 
Lake Division. 
Lac la Hache band . . . . . . . 100 — — 
8. Canim Lake band. . . . . . . 350 85 n 
Green Timber band . . . . . . . 100! = — 
Tow. . . . . . 550 85 ” 
North Thompson Division. 
9. Upper North Thompson band. 20 | Estimated 
70 or lesst 70 
10. Lower North Thompson band . 500 130 130 
1x. Kinbaskets . . oo. oo... 150 56 62 
Tow. . Lo... 900 256 262 
T 
Bonaparte Division. 
12. Pavilion band... +... 150 8 8 
13. Bonaparte band . . . . . . . 400 158 160 
Main Thompson band . . . . . . 1508 - - 
Tow. . . . . . 700 226 8 
| Kamloops Division. | 
14. Deadman’s Creek. . . . . . .| 350 116 I 122 
15. Kamloops band . . . . . . . 550 243 uz 
Towl. . .... 900 359 364 
                
+ The relative number of these three bands is not quite certain, A few people of Lac la Hache settled at Williams Lake. - + Estimated by myself as not included in the returns of the Indian Departmen. * This band had suffered a considerable decrease prior to the year 1850. They probably numbered fully 300 somewhere about 1820 or 1825. The remnant seiled with the Bonsparte band, a few with the Deadmaa's Creek baad. + Including accessions from the Lower North Thompson band and also from the South Thompson band since 1860,

----

466 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
    
      
  
  
  
        
  | Esmareo Reromns or Inniax Derr. 
Ban. [PoruLaTIoN ABUT - 
i850. 1903. 1906. 
Shuwap Lake Divison. | | 
16. South Thompson band . . n 400 154 152 
17. Adams Lake band . . . . . . 100 sy | 194 
18. Shuswap Lake band. . . . . . 200 5 58 19. Syallumeheen band . . 300 Ho | 150 
so. Arrow Lake band | 100 26 is 
Toa es po boy 
          
Comparing the returns of the Indian Department for 1906 with those 
of 1903, it appears that during the three years, 12 of the 19 bands reported 
on showed an increase, 4 showed a decrease, and 3 were stationary. By divisions the results are as follows: — 
Division. Increase. Decrease. 
Fraser River division + + +... oo... 2; - Lake division . . Ce - 6 
North Thompson division - +... LL... ...... 6 — Bonaparte division... . . . . oo... LL... : - Kamloops division . . . . . . . ............ 5 — 
Shuswap Lake division . «o.oo... TW — 
57 6 Net increase in 1996... . . o.oo . st 
MiGRATIONS AND INTERCOURSE. — Some whites believe that the Shuswap 
never had any permanent settlements west of Fraser River, while others 
think that they at one time occupied nearly all the Chilcotin country extend- 
ing in a continuous line to the Bella Coola, but that they have gradually 
been driven out of that country. 
Both of these beliefs are altogether wrong. There is an abundance of 
evidence to disprove: the former opinion, and there is no evidence whatever 
in support of the latter. Not even the traditions of the tribes lend support 
to these theories. The Shuswap claim that they never occupied the country 
farther west than they did in 1858, when the white miners arrived. No 
doubt, the Chilcotin would have liked to dispossess the Shuswap of the 
valuable fishing:sites at the Cafton of Chilcotin River and along Fraser River; 
but, being a weak tribe in comparison with the Shuswap, they were no

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 467 
doubt unable to do so. It is very likely that they envied the Shuswap their 
possession of Fraser River, for they began to occupy it as soon as it was 
safe to do so, after the extinction of the Shuswap inhabitants of that region 
and the introduction of white men's laws, which recognized no tribal boun- 
daries, and precluded the possibility of war and retaliation. It seems, there is only one tradition of an historical migration known 
to the tribe, — that of Kenpésket, a wellknown North Thompson chief, who, with fifty or sixty friends, mostly members of the same division, migrat- 
ed to the head of Columbia River, on the confines of the Kootenai tribe. 
Kempé'sket and some of his followers had often been in that region on hunting-trips, and knew the country well. They made the trips mostly with 
canoes by way of Canoe River; and on arriving at their destination, they 
made an alliance with the Stony Indians of the Rocky Mountains, some of 
whom were in the habit of going to Columbia River in the fall to fish for 
salmon. The Shuswap depended on them for aid in case the Kootenai should 
try to drive them out; and the Stonies were protected by the Shuswap 
against the Kootenai in niaintaining their rights to fish salmon and to pick 
berries in that region. This migration took place about sixty-five years ago. 
Every two or three years Kenpé'sket, or some of his people, would visit 
their old home; and upon their return to their own village others frequently 
accompanied them, to remain in the new settlement for a time or perma- nently. Gradually, as a new generation sprang up in both places, the fricnd- 
ship relaxed, and of late years there has been very littly intercourse between 
the Kinbaskets and their kindred. At present some of the Shuswap Lake 
Indians use the railroad when visiting the Kinbaskets. 
Although in the Shuswap country intercourse was easy between almost 
all parts, yet, as might be expected, owing to the great extent of territory, 
the people of the extreme north, south, east, and west, very seldom met one 
another. The Kamloops people had the most intercourse with the other 
divisions, particularly after the founding of a trading-post about 1812, for 
the members of most bands repaired there with their furs. The Bonaparte 
Indians had much intercourse with the Kamloops division, and a good deal 
with the lower bands of the Fraser River and Lake divisions. There was 
intimate intercourse between all the bands living on both sides of Fraser 
River, although those living in the extreme south did not have much direct 
dealings with those of the extreme north. The Fraser division had rather 
frequent intercourse with the Lake people, and these in turn with the North 
Thompson people, the lower portion of whom often met the Kamloops band. 
The Shuswap Lake people also visited Kamloops often. On the whole, it 
seems that the Upper North Thompson people, and the Spallumcheen and Arrow Lake bands, were most isolated, and had least opportunity of meeting 
with other divisions. Intercourse became more general after the introduction     
 

----

468 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
of horses; but, as the Upper North Thompson and Shuswap Lake people 
lived in the most forested part of the country, least favorable for the main- 
tenance of horses, this factor had little influence on them. 
The Pavilion and High Bar bands had most intercourse with the Lil- 
looet; the main Thompson and the Bonaparte bands, with the Thompson 
Indians. The Fraser River bands from Big Bar south, and the Kamloops 
division, met the Thompson Indians much more rarely. The Kamloops, 
Spallumcheen, and Arrow Lake bands visited the Okanagon; the Kinbaskets 
and Arrow Lake bands, the Kootenai. The Upper North Thompson bands 
came into contact with the small band of Iroquois and with the Cree; the 
Soda Creek band, with the Carrier; and the Cafion division, with the Chilcotin. 
The Iroquois band must have settled in this region in the carly part of 
last century, perhaps as carly as 1816 or thereabouts. They followed the 
Canadian fur-traders as servants, free trappers, and hunters. They probably 
entered the region from the northwest by way of Fraser River, as, according 
to Father Morice, the Yellow Head Pass was not discovered until shortly 
prior to 1827.1 
These Iroquois were sometimes visited by the North Thompson division, 
and were also met on hunting-trips. Formerly, for many years they had a 
stationary village at Téte Jaune Cache, which is said to be named from a 
yellow-haired Iroquois trapper. Many of them tried to avoid Shuswap par- 
ties if they thought they belonged to the western bands Some of them were 
half Shuswap long ago, as in former days they occasionally abducted and 
maried girls from the Lake and Northern Fraser River people. Once many 
years ago they captured a girl from the Soda Creek band who happened to 
be picking berrics alone. A party of men followed them to the head waters 
of the Fraser River, where at last they came to their camp while the fire 
was still smoking. The Iroquois had escaped, and left the girl tied to a tree 
and choked to death with a handkerchief. Her basket was hanging from a 
limb of the same tree. The Iroquois were generally tall, large men, some 
of them very light in complexion, and others very dark. Their language 
was not understood. Nearly all of them also spoke French, and some of 
them spoke Shuswap and Cree. Occasionally a few of them came down to 
Kamloops to sell furs. 
Wherever there was much intercourse, there was frequent intermarriage, 
and therefore all the above-mentioned people had more or less foreign blood. 
The bands of the Lake division had practically no intercourse with strange 
people, and some other bands had very little. It would seem that there is 
a good deal of Athapascan blood in some parts of the Shuswap tribe. It is 
said that the Soda Creek band at one time, through frequent intermarriage, 
  
+ See Morice, History of the Northern Interior of Briish Columbia, p. 153.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 469 
was nearly half Carrier in blood, especially their village of Kalaxu'sten, 
nearest to Alexandria. The Cafion division, about fifty years ago, were 
strongly mixed with Chilcotin, so much so that the people of the North 
Cafton band spoke chiefly Chilcotin in many houses; and the other bands 
had also a considerable amount of Chilcotin admixture. Before these people were practically exterminated by small-pox, they used to intermarry 
frequently with all the neighboring bands of Fraser River. At present the 
Alkali Lake band has the greatest amount of Chilcotin blood; but there is 
a liwle at Dog Creek, Canoe Creck, and nearly all along Fraser River. 
Intermarriage with the Lillooet was chiefly through the Fountain band of 
the Lillooet; but, as these people were originally half Shuswap, there proba- 
bly was not very much real Lillooet blood introduced. The Pavilion band 
at present is much mixed with Lillooet, chiefly of Fountain. 
Intermarriage with the Thompson Indians and Okanagon does not seem 
to have been so extensive as with the Athapascan tribes. The extinct main 
Thompson band frequently intermarried with the Thompson Indians; and the 
Bonaparte, High Bar, and Kamloops people did the same, though to a less 
extent. The Kamloops and Spallumcheen bands did not commonly inter- 
marry with the Okanagon. The Arrow Lake band intermarried a great deal 
with the Kootenai, and formerly sometimes with the Okanagon of the 
Columbia. At the present day they are said to be nearly half Kootenai in 
blood. The Kinbaskets have also mixed to some extent with the Kootenai, and no doubt also with the Stonics, who themselves are mixed with Cree. 
As already mentioned, the Upper North Thompson people intermarried often 
with the Cree, and to a less extent with the Iroquois band of the Rocky 
Mountains. Some extraneous blood has been introduced by slaves. Most of the latter 
were sold back to their respective tribes (excepting the Sekanai); but some 
women were retained, and bore many children to their masters. In this way 
a number of North Thompson people are descended from Sekanai women, 
and several individuals along Fraser River are pointed out as being of 
Lillooet and Staxai‘ux descent. At the present day the percentage of mix- 
ture with whites is not any greater than among the Thompson Indians, and 
I did not hear of any mixture with either negroes or Chinese. There is 
now hardly any intermarriage between the Shuswap and Athapascan tribes. 
MenTaL Trams. — The Shuswap seem to be less conservative than the 
Thompson Indians, and have been quicker to accept the teachings of the 
missionaries, and to discard their old ways of life. This is evidenced in 
many ways. Shamans still practise among theThompson Indians; and dan- 
cing. feasting, and potlatching of different kinds are not infrequent. Basket, 
bag, and mat making are still important industries. Parts of the old style 
of dress, and a few men with long and braided hair, may still be seen; and 
 

----

470 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
stone pipes are still commonly used. Among the Shuswap all these have 
disappeared entirely, or almost entirely. 
The Shuswap are affectionate and indulgent to their children, courteous 
to strangers, and kind to their friends, although in these points probably 
not much more than are other neighboring tribes. They are more reserved 
than the Thompson Indians, have a more serious mien, and on the whole 
are perhaps slightly less affable, and not so inclined to be helpful to stran- 
gers, except when asked. However, in general deportment, in honesty, and 
in manner of speech, they resemble the Thompson tribe. The latter consider 
the Shuswap to be a people possessed of much courage, stability of character, 
and tenacity of purpose, not whimsical, and not very jocular, but inclined 
to be conceited, and easily offended. In 1703 the Carrier Indians described 
the Shuswap to Sir Alexander Mackenzie as ‘a very malignant race, who 
lived in large subterranean recesses.” Simon Fraser, who traversed their 
country in 1808, and probably saw many members of all the Fraser River 
bands, said of them. “The Atnah wish to be friendly to strangers. The 
men are tall and slender, of a serious disposition, and inclined to industry. . .. 
They are great travellers, and have been at war beyond the Rocky Moun- 
tains. ... I must say that during the whole time we were there, and although 
many things were let loose and scattered about in such a manner as to 
afford all opportunity to the natives, nothing went astray. The Atnahs 
therefore seem more honest than any other tribe on this side of the moun- 
tains”? The people of the various divisions of the Shuswap varied a good 
deal in disposition. 
Suicide was formerly rather common, the causes sometimes being very 
trivial, such as apparent slight or neglect by a relative, or shame. Imbecili- 
ty and insanity are rare. It may be worth while stating here the opinions held by the tribe regarding the qualities and average characteristics of their neighbors and 
also of the several divisions of their own people in former days. To begin 
with the Shuswap themselves, the people of the Fraser River, Bonaparte, 
and Kamloops divisions, were considered the most typical Shuswap, good 
horsemen, manly, bold but without rashness, warlike, proud, inclined to be 
cruel, aggressive, independent, fond of sport, and often vain. 
The Empire Valley band of the Fraser River division was considered 
inferior in every way. They were said to be less energetic. poorer, and 
more timid, than the other bands. 
The Cafion division were expert salmon-fishers, influential, impulsive, 
bold, crafty, proud, cunning as traders, loquacious, liberal in gifts, wealthy, 
leaders in feasting, dancing, and potlatching, and leaders of fashion among 
  
© See Mackensie, 1. c, p. 245. © See Fraser's Journal, pp. 166 and 167.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 471 
the western Shuswap, expert gamblers, opposed to war and feuds, sometimes 
lazy. They seldom did any travelling, hunting, or trapping. 
The Lake division were the most expert fishermen and trappers, good 
hunters, independent, peaceable, non-aggressive, quiet, mild-dispositioned, un- 
warlike, rather poor! and not stylish in dress or showy in manners. 
The North Thompson division were probably the best hunters and 
greatest travellers. They were mild, quiet, steady, rather serious, hospitable, 
rather poor. 
The Shuswap Lake division resembled the North Thompson people in 
almost all their characteristics. They also travelled considerably, and were 
good fishermen, canoe-men, and trappers, but rather poor. 
The Kinbaskets and Arrow Lake band may be classed with the last two. The Bonaparte division were considered to be the poorest canoc-men. 
The Shuswap of the southern bands were thought to be the tallest, and 
those of the eastern bands to have long faces and long heads. The Carrier were considered to be of medium height, lightskinned, 
good-looking, good trappers, gentle, sociable, good-natured, careless, jocular, loquacious, fond of singing, of great shamanistic powers. 
The Chilcotin were shorter than the Carrier and Shuswap, not so good- 
looking, good hunters and trappers, bold, rough, proud, boastful, cunning, 
somewhat treacherous, careless in dress, more warlike and quarrelsome than 
the Carrier and some other tribes, somewhat given to thieving, and of great 
shamanistic power. 
The Lillooet were noted for shortness of stature, roundness of face or 
head, tendency to obesity among the women; they were good canoc-men 
and salmon-fishers, poor horsemen, good basket-makers, sharp traders, a 
people with many taboos and restrictions, unwarlike, mild, generous, hospi 
table, rather quiet, sociable, mostly good-natured; their women less chaste 
than those of most of the tribes. Their weapons were inferior. These char- 
acteristics were more marked among the Lower Lillooet. 
The tribes of the Fraser delta and the coast were not much known, but 
they were noted for shortness of stature, stoutness of build, large or broad 
heads, ugliness of their women, also largeness of their canoes. They were 
supposed to be good canoe-men and poor travellers and hunters. 
The staxa’iux and other Thompson Indians of Fraser River were thought 
to resemble the Lillooet in disposition and general character. 
The people of Lytton and other Upper Thompson bands — called by the 
Shuswap ‘the real Thompson” — were considered to be of medium height, 
good fishermen and hunters, good-looking (especially the women), fairly 
wealthy, warlike, brave, many good-natured, some treacherous, careful, tasty, 
showy but not vain, great orators, resourceful, tactful, very successful lehal- 
players, obliging, hospitable, skilful and neat in weapons, clothes, utensils,

----

472 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
fond of painting designs on everything, having many restrictions and observ- 
ances, rather fond of sport, and good horsemen. The Okanagon were thought to resemble the ‘real Thompson® in nearly 
all essentials. They were rather tall, good-looking, most expert horsemen, wealthy (particularly the southern ones), fond of fine clothing and of painting 
their clothes and utensils, warlike and independent, stubborn, but not very 
aggressive or revengeful. They had fine songs, and were fond of singing 
and playing, also of oratory. 
The people of Similkameen were unwarlike, milder and poorer than the 
Okanagon, also more careless and less skilful, not fond of fine dress or much 
ornamentation; they were hospitable. 
The Kootenai were tall, and similar in most ways to the Okanagon, 
but rather milder and more simple and hospitable. 
The Stonies were similar to the Kootenai, but more talkative and rather 
fond of display. 
The Blackfeet were not well known, but noted as a tall people, very 
numerous, warlike, and buffalohunters. Otherwise they were supposed to 
resemble the southern Okanagon. 
The Cree were considered the tallest people, had very long hair, good- 
looking women; they were proud, dignified, rather reserved, warlike but not very revengeful, hospitable, good travellers, fond of good dress; some of 
their weapons were inferior. 
The Iroquois band were tall; according to some, light-skinned; according 
to others, very dark-skinned; good trappers, hunters, and canoe-men; quiet, 
not aggressive or revengeful; inclined to be cruel; inclined to thieving, espe- 
cially to stealing girls. 
The Beavers were not much known, but said to be a taller people 
than the Sekanai, richer, better dressed, and good hunters. 
The Sekanai were a thin, wiry people, good travellers, expert trappers 
and hunters, unwarlike, their weapons inferior. 
At the present day the characteristics of the tribes are described more 
from the white man's point of view. Thus, on the whole, the Shuswap are 
considered religious, because they pay attention to the observances of the 
Christian religion; progressive, because they copy the example of the whites 
very closely in all essentials; industrious, because they work extensively on 
their own reserves, and labor for the whites. 
The people of those bands formerly noted for warfare are now the most 
industrious; generally the wealthiest, having most money, utensils, stock, etc. ; 
usually the most addicted to liquor, and on account of this the greatest 
offenders against the law. On the other hand, those people formerly noted 
as of a mild temperament are less industrious live somewhat more in the old 
way: are poorer, or have at least fewer white man's goods and food; do not 
care much for liquor: and live up to their religious professions better.

----

II. — MANUFACTURES. 
Inpumsents. — The implements and utensils of the Shuswap were prac- 
tically the same as those of the Thompson Indians, and the remarks on the 
latter! are also applicable to the Shuswap. Arrow-points, spear-points, and 
knives were chipped and flaked. They were made of glassy basalt, but 
other stones were sometimes used; viz. chert, obsidian, jasper, chalcedony, 
agate, quartz, and a smooth, brittle green stone, which generally flakes well, 
and is found in volcanic parts of the mountains. Tomahawk-heads were 
sometimes made of the same material and in the same way as arrow-heads. 
Arrow-flakers were of various sizes, and preferably of buck-antler. Many 
were double-ended. Celts used for a variety of purposes, such as clubs, 
axcheads, chisels, adzes, and skinscrapers, were made of jade and serpen- 
tine. They were cut and worked by rubbing with gritty sandstone, and 
sometimes with stone crystals and beaver-teeth. Knives and daggers were also sometimes made of jade. A large rubbed stone point is shown in Fig. 201. In the collections made by Mr. Harlan 1. Smith at Kamloops, rubbed points of such size do not occur, the majority of stone points being made by chipping.  Skin-scrapers were usually made from chips of bowlders which split well, but occasionally were flaked from basalt, in the same manner as the arrow-points. 
Pestles and hand-hammers were made of many kinds of stone; those least liable to split, and at the same time not too hard, being chosen. They were worked into shape by pecking with a jade pestle made for the purpose. The ham- mers were used for driving chisels, wedges, and stakes. They Fig, 201 Gig. ATC Short, the body is conical without separate striking-head, Rathed Sine Paine. and the tip is slightly thickened and forms a rounded knob. Lengthy 13m Out of six hand-hammers, three have this form, while the others are elongated pebbles with one end battered flat’ The style of hammer with flat heads was not known. Heavier stakes for weirs were driven with 
See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 182 and 183. # See Harlan 1. Senth, The Archeology of the Thompson River Region, Vol. I of this series, Fig. 341 , pans. + See Harlan I. Smith, Archology of Lytton, B. C., Vol. 1 of this seriet, Figs, 38 sand 30, p. 138. ¢ See Harlan 1. Smith, Stone Hammers or Pesties of the Northwest Const of America (American Anthro- pologist, N.S, Vol. 1, Fig. 11 4 p. 365). 
    
Jars]

----

474 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
large flat bowlders held in both hands, or with mallet-shaped stone hammers, 
the handles of which were formed by a twisted withe which was bent over 
the stone and twisted together, so that the stone was held firmly in the loop 
of the withe. The latter was sometimes stiffened with a rod. Light stakes 
and pegs were driven with small flat stones, wooden mallets, generally a 
piece of pole flattened a little at the butt-end, and ordinary hand-hammers. 
Sandstone arrow-smoothers with grooves were made with beaver-tooth knives. 
Steatite was also cut with those knives. Pipes were made of this material; they were bored with flaked basalt points’ and with other drills rotated 
between the hands. Paint-dishes * hollowed out slightly on one or both sides, 
and round in shape, were also made of steatite. Whetstones and files were made of sandstone or gritstone of various 
degrees of coarseness. Flat bowlders were provided with a shallow depres. 
sion on one side, and used for pounding tobacco, etc., on. Mortars® were 
also occasionally made and used for similar purposes. Anvils consisted of 
flat, tough, and smooth bowlders. 
Large chisels for cutting trees were made of clk, caribou, and buck 
antler. The last-named material was considered best. Small chisels were of 
antler and bone. Wedges were of antler and hard wood, and occasionally 
of stone. Adzes, knives, and daggers were also made of antler and bone.t 
All these tools differed in no way from those used by the Thompson Indians. 
Adze-handles like those of the Coast Indians® were unknown. Tools were 
hafted with antler and wood in the same manner as among the Thompson 
people. Awls and needles were made of bone. Carving or incising on wood 
and stone was donc with beaver-tooth knives. Antler and bone were cut 
and carved with knives of basalt having crooked points.® Two other imple- 
ments used for incising on antler, wood, and bone, were made of iron, but 
in early days may have been made of bone. They were often made of the 
handles of kettles procured from the Hudson Bay Company. One was a 
kind of bit used for making circles. Some of them had two. points, thus 
making double circles. The handle was rotated between the hands in the 
manner of a firedrill. The other instrument was used for making grooves, 
straight lines, and zigzag patterns. It was like a chisel, and some had more 
than one point for making parallel lines when necessary. Those used for 
making grooves in arrow-shafts had the edge rounded to fit the shaft, and 
the point on one side (occasionally in the centre) to make the groove. Antler 
and bone were generally soaked in water or boiled to make them easy to 
    
+ See Vol 1 of this series, Fig. 352, eg, p. 415. © These were probably the seme as or similar to Fig. 343 4, Vol 1 of this series, p. 413. 5 See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 342, p. 413. 4 See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 123, p. 183. + Ibid, Fig. 124, p. 183. * Ibid.) Figs. 125 and 136, p. 184. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 475 
work, and it is said that even stone and wood were also in some cases sof- 
tened in this way. 
Iron seems to have been first introduced early ‘in the middle of the 
eighteenth century, but continued to be very scarce until 1810 or later. 
Gradually, however, iron superseded all other materials in the making of 
most kinds of implements. As long as stone implements were made, arrow- 
flakers made of antler were considered superior to iron ones, as they took a 
better grip and did not slip. Some awls and needles of bone are used at 
the present day. 
1 did not hear of the use of bows for drilling, such as are applied by 
the Carrier.! Pottery was not made. Tools for digging paints, -copper, etc., 
consisted of spikes or picks, and pinch-bars of wood and antler. Frequently 
short root-diggers and bark-peelers, and sometimes chisels made of antler and driven with stone hammers, and scrapers, were used for this purpose. 
The scrapers were made of wood, bone, and antler, but generally consisted 
of crooked sticks, somewhat spoon-shaped, like the sticks used for removing 
the brains out of the skulls of animals. They were used for scraping from 
seams decomposed rock which served as paint. Chisels and pinch-bars were inserted in cracks, and fragments of rocks were split off by their means. In 
a few places at which paint has been gathered for long periods. deep holes 
and small tunnels were formed, which were worked along the seams of paint- 
rock or in those directions where the rock showed least resistance. In other 
places the material was obtained more easily, being found in the talus slope 
of cliffs. Snow-shovels were used by all the northern Shuswap bands. Some 
of these were made of a single piece of wood, in the shape of an oar-blade 
or a spade. They had a handle of nearly the same length as an ordinary 
paddle? In some places the blade was cut off slanting. Probably, however, 
most of the snow-shovels were made of birch-bark. One kind was made 
somewhat like a grain-shovel, with handle and stays of wood; and a smaller 
kind was somewhat like a dustpan in shape, with a short handle. Baskets 
and bark trays were also used for removing snow. 
Panviise. — The Shuswap claim that they did not decorate objects as 
elaborately as the Thompson tribe. However, they made use of a varicty 
of paints and dyes. A dull red ochre, obtained in various parts of the 
country, was used extensively. Micaceous hematite, giving a reddish spar- 
Kling color, was used for decorating bows and arrows and as facial paint. 
The root of Lithospermum angustifolium dipped in hot grease, giving a blood-red color, which with age changed to a purplish shade, was used principally for painting gambling-sticks. Wolfmoss (Zvernia vulping) was   
3 A. G. Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés (Trassactons of the Canadien Insite, Session 1893-93, Fig. 131, pe 143) + Ibid, Fig. 104, p. 115.

----

476 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
dipped in water and used for painting the face and large surfaces, skins, 
etc. It gives a light-yellowish or pale-green color. Charcoal and soot were 
employed as black paints. White (obtained from a white clay or chalk) and blue (made from a blue earth or clay) were chiefly used as face and body 
paints. A yellow ochre, found in some parts of the country, was also used. 
A very light, brightred ochre was obtained from a spot in the Rocky Moun- 
tains called Teextca'tcks, or Tsketca'tcks, where it was gathered in bags made 
of skins of marmots shot there for the purpose. It was prepared by knead- 
ing with water in a bark vessel, and then spreading it on flat stones before 
the fire to dry. When thoroughly dry and brittle, it was put in a mortar 
or in a skin bag and pounded up fine with a pestle of stone. Another 
lightred ochre was obtained from the east side of Adams Lake. Graphite, 
found on the Thompson River, was used as facial paint. Some kinds of 
ochre and hematite were prepared by roasting in the fire. 
By far the most common dyes used were alder-bark and wolf-moss; the 
former imparting a reddish, and the latter a yellowish color. The former 
especially was much used for dyeing gambling-sticks, quills, hair, feathers, 
straw, etc., and also for imparting a red tinge to dressed skins and buckskin 
clothes. These were immersed for some time in a decoction of alder-bark, 
then taken out and wrung, and again soaked until the desired shade was 
obtained. Another dye, also much used, was obtained from an unidentified 
plant, the dead leaves of which, when boiled, gave a reddish juice. It was 
employed for the same purpose as alder-bark, and it is said to have been 
also extensively used by the Chilcotin and Thompson tribes. Some other 
dyes, used principally by the more southern bands, were the seeding head 
of Chenopodium capitatum, giving a red or pinkish color; and the stems and 
roots of an unidentified plant, probably a fern, which gave a black color. 
Cherry-bark, used for birch-bark baskets and for basket-weaving, is sometimes. 
dyed by being buried in black mud. 
Some other dyes mentioned by Dr. Dawson' may have been used in 
the southeastern part of the country. Berry-juices were very seldom used 
either as dyes or paints. The Shuswap claim that the Thompson Indians 
used a greater variety of dyes than they did. 
Paintbrushes were made of elk-hair. or paints were applied with a 
pointed stick or the fingertip. Nowadays hardly any painting or dyeing is 
done by the tribe. 
PrepARATION OF Skixs. — All the methods of tanning and dressing skins 
found among the Thompson tribe* were also employed by the Shuswap. 
Among the latter, the stick used for scraping the skin on was invariably 
pointed, and placed in a slanting position, with the butt-end planted in the 
  
The Shuswap People of Briish Columbia, p. 23. 2 See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 184— 156.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 477 
ground, so that the skin was held in place by the point of the stick; while 
among the Thompson tribe several kinds were used. The knives and scrapers 
of both tribes were the same. The people of the Fraser River division 
treated skins, both with hair and without, nearly always with salmon-oil 
but most of the bands used brains of large game for this purpose. Only 
buckskin dressed without oil was smoked. At the present day, owing to 
scarcity of oil and brains, skins are mostly prepared wirh soap. Skins were 
generally cleaned and the hair removed at the hunting-camp, while they 
were still fresh. They were then dried and folded up until winter, which 
was the time for skin-dressing. They were then soaked in water, wrung, 
and hung up for several days to freeze. The Shuswap declare that skins 
are rendered much easier to dress by freezing. Needles, awls, and pins were like those of the Thompson Indians. 
Thread and twine were made of bark of Indian hemp (Apocynum cannabinum) 
and of elzagnus (Eleagnus argentea); common nettles; sinew from the back of the deer, elk, and caribou; and dressed and undressed skin (babiche) cut 
into thin strings. Skins were wrung in the manner described before.® and 
also in the way described by Dr. Boas! Basketry. — Basketry was once an important industry in the tribe, 
although probably never developed to the same extent as among the Lillooet 
and Thompson tribes. Birch-bark baskets of various shapes and excellent 
workmanship were made by all parts of the tribe, and were put to many 
different uses. The Shuswap were nofed for the great quantity and good 
quality of their birch-bark manufactures. Their work was similar to the best 
class of baskets made by the Upper Thompson Indians, and the shapes were 
the same. From description it seems that all the shapes known among the 
Chilcotin and Carrier * were also made by the Shuswap. 
A noticeable feature of Shuswap and Carrier bark baskets is their ten- 
dency to have corners, or, in other words, squareness. It may be scen 
among the Chilcotin and Lillooet bark baskets as well. This tendency is 
clearly seen among the latter in their woven carrying-baskets. On the other 
hand, among the Thompson and Okanagon the tendency is toward roundness. 
at least in their older work; and this is one of the distinguishing features between Thompson and Lillooet woven carrying-baskets.* 
These baskets were sewed with split spruceroots, and the rims were   
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, p. 185. + Tid, p. 186. + Sinth Report on the North-Wesern Tribes of Canada (Report of the tish Association for the Advance: ment of Science, 1890, p 636). See Morice, Notes on the Western énés (Transactions of the Canadian Insite, Session 189293, pp. 130. 134). * The Thompson Indians site that in former times the angles of thir burdenbaskets vere more rounded than they are made nowadays. The change in syle is comsidered to be due to the influence of the Lillooet, whose buskery is considered of parcalar excellence. The older burden-baskets of the Thompson tribe had al sragher, less faring sides than those of the Lillooet.

----

478 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
covered with stitching of the same material. Dyed and undyed goose and 
swan quills split and scraped thin, dyed horschair, and the glossy bark of 
the bird-cherry (Prunus sp.), were also worked in on the rims for ornamen- 
tation. Some of the baskets had also pictographic and geometric designs 
incised on the sides. Basketry is still made, but the workmanship is not as 
good as formerly. The Alkali Lake band is reputed for making the best 
quality of birch-bark basketry. 
A few baskets are shown in Figs. 202-205. The cut of the birch 
bark is the same as that used by the Thompson Indians! The flaps are 
  Fig. 201 (sy) Pirchbark Basket, a, Front and sim; 4 Short side. Height, 30 cn. 
turned up so that the grain of the bark runs parallel to the rim. The sides of all these baskets are sewed up with single (Fig. 203, 4), double (Fig. 
202, 4), or triple (Fig. 205) zigzag stitches; while the lower flap is sewed to the sides either by close vertical stitches (Fig. 202, ), or by looser stitches (Fig. 
203, 4), which sometimes form an angle with the edges of the flap (Fig. 203). 
The upper rim of the basket is finished off with a close sewing of spruce- 
root, by means of which a rod, which is generally placed on the inside, is 
sewed to the birch-bark. In all the specimens this sewing is more or less 
ornamental. Since the stitches which pass through the bark always tear out 
in the direction of the grain, a close sewing would invariably tear the bark. 
In order to avoid this, stitches at certain definite intervals are carried farther 
down from the rim. Thus we find in some baskets one single long stitch 
alternating with three or more stitches which pass directly over and under 
  
1 See Val. 1 of this series, Fig. 130, p. 187.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 479 
the rod (Fig. 203). In.another basket there are two such long stitches al- 
ternating with from six to ten short stitches (Fig. 204). In the best baskets 
the stitches have regularly alternating lengths (Figs. 202, 205); the stitch 
passing directly under the rod being followed by a slightly longer one, which 
  Fig. 203 (sity) Birchbark Basket, 6, Fron; 4, Short side; ¢, Design on back. Height, 26 cm. 
in tun is followed by a still longer onc. Thus a triangular form of orna- 
mentation along the rim of the basket is produced. In the two best baskets 
here illustrated (Figs. 202, 203), the rim, at the middle of the long sides and 
short ends, is decorated with bunches of dycd horsehair instead of spruce- root. In the former specimen the horsehair is dyed black and red, the red 
being in the middle, and being followed on each side by black; in the latter 
specimen the horsehair on the long sides is dyed blue, while that on the short sides is dyed yellow. 
The rim is further ornamented in the former specimen by passing two

----

480 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
strips of cherry-bark dyed red under and over the stitches (Fig. 202, a). 
In this way a checker-design is produced. In another specimen (Fig. 204) a 
similar ornamentation is made by passing a ribbon consisting of a number of 
threads over and under the stitches. The arrangement is somewhat irregular. 
On the whole, the ribbon is covered by three or four stitches, and then passes over two or three stitches. 
All these baskets are ornamented with incised patterns, which consist 
largely of rows of triangles and zigzag lines. On two of the baskets the 
design is confined to one side, evidently the front of the basket; while on 
.the two others, designs are found all round the baskets. In these last two 
specimens there are also a considerable number of realistic designs. 
Breaks in baskets are mended by 
TT J} an overand-over stitch, by means of 
which the two edges of the break are 
brought together. The whole is calked 
with gum. 
A comparison of these baskets 
with a series of Chilcotin baskets col- 
lected by Mr. Teit shows that the 
general technique among both tribes 
is practically the same. In both cases 
the bark is turned in such a way that 
the grain runs parallel with the rim. 
An examination of the stitches shows 
that every stitch tends to tear out at 
least twice its width in the direction 
of the grain of the bark. For this 
reason the alternation in length of the 
stitches is quite necessary. In those baskets in which there is close stitch 
ing, with a few long stitches at long 
intervals, many places of the close 
stitching are torn out. In the Chilcotin baskets the curved outline of the 
upper rim is not so pronounced as in the Shuswap baskets. The style of 
decoration of the rim described before, by inserting a sewing of dyed material 
at a few places, occurs in only two of the Chilcotin baskets. In one of these 
horsehair is inserted, not at the short ends and in the middle of the wide 
sides, as in the Shuswap baskets, but, instead of that, at the points on the 
rim midway between the long and the short diameter. Another one, which 
has a rectangular rim, has analogous ornamentation of broad quills in the 
middle of each side, the ornamental strip consisting of white quill-work bor- 
dered by black. In this specimen the flaps are on the wide sides. Two of 
    Fig. 204 (gfe) Birchbark Basket, Hiight, 17 cm.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 481 
the +Chilcotin baskets have the 3-step stitching on the rim. Another one, 
whith is sewed with very thick spruce-root, has alternate stitching, with every 
eighth or tenth stitch considerably longer than the rest. One is sewed very 
unevenly with flattened quill. A flat dish from the Chilcotin is shown in 
Fig. 206. It has a strong rod outside, and even stitches, which, however, 
are so far apart, that there is no danger of their tearing out. On account 
of the great width of the dish, the two shorter ends have the grain of the 
bark running at right angles to the rim. Still wider stitching is applied in 
one roughly-made small birch-bark basket which has the rod of the rim inside. 
  Fig. 205 (chs). Birchbark Basket. Height, 21.5 cm. 
A comparison of these baskets with a series collected on the Lower 
Yukon shows clearly that the types used by the Shuswap and those used 
by the northwestern Athapascans are identical in form. The Alaskan buckets 
are of the same description as those described by Mr. Teit, of which, however, 
no specimen is available. They are all folded in such a way that the bark 
runs parallel or nearly parallel with the rim. All of these have a strip of 
bark, which serves for strengthening the rim, placed around the outside, the 
grain of this strip of bark running at right angles to the rim (Fig. 207). 
In four of these the device of alternation of long and short stitches is used,

----

482 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
while one specimen — the one illustrated here — has a series of short 
stitches alternating with two long stitches. 
In stitching in the flap, we find the chain-stitch used, which is also 
applied in baskets from eastern North America (see Fig. 214, 4), or the cat- 
stitch (Fig. 207, 6). The handles of these baskets consist of a leather band which is wound 
spirally with spruce-root, interrupted at regular intervals by winding with dyed 
quill. The wrapping is held in place by a medial sewing with spruce-root, 
made like the shoemaker's stitch (Fig. 207, a). 
The same method 
of strengthening the 
rim is also used in 
bark ~ dishes from 
the Yukon (Fig. 
208). In some cases 
these are still fur 
ther strengthened 
by sewing on a flat 
rod. The greater 
number of Alaskan 
basketry trays are folded, not cut out, and are protected 
in the manner illus- 
trated in Fig. 200. 
In most of these 
the sewing around the rim, which is 
often provided with 
two rods, — one inside, and one out- 
side, — is rather 
open, or arranged in 
ornamental groups, 
as shown in Figs. 209, 210, and 212. There is a considerable diversity of 
devices by which the strengthening of the rim is used to obtain ornamental 
effects. In one specimen an ornamental effect and increased strength are 
attained by the hitched stitch at the folded ends of the basket illustrated in Fig. 211. 
A few baskets from the same region show the same kind of rim-deco- ration that was discussed before; a dyed ribbon being caught under the 
stitches, and being exposed for one or more stitches. In several baskets    
           _ pre     &    
  Fig. 206 (s}s) Bark Dish. a, Side; 4, Bottom. Length, 413 cm.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 483 
these ribbons are woven in, as described before (see Fig. 202), and sometimes form quite complicated patterns (Fig. 212). The rim of two small well-made baskets of this type, in which the looped stitch is also used to obtain a deco- rative effect on the inside, are shown in Fig. 212, 4. 
     
      
       
       RA, Tf        
   Fig. 207, a (sits) 6 (oko) Bark Buckets, Alssks. Height, 24 cu 17.5 cm. 
1 am inclined to believe that this style of decoration is more primitive 
than the imbricated treatment of coiling which is so characteristic of the 
Lillooet, Thompson River, Klickitat, and some other tribes of the same 
district. In the discussion of the Lillooet coiled basketry (Fig. 69, 6, p. 206 
IL    ling 
he aay 
Nt          
Fig. 268, a (4i8sh 4 (338g Bark Dishes with Strengthened Rims. Alaska, Length, 22.5 cm. 41 cm. 
of this volume), attention was called to the occurrence of decoration produced 
by weaving in double or triple strips of dyed grass under the coiling. This 
method is identical with the one described here. It is also worth calling 
attention to the fact that a similar basket has been collected among the 
Clallam, which, however, is presumably of Lillooet provenience. In this 
specimen the overlaying is similar to those rims of baskets in which a single 
strip of colored material covers a considerable number of stitches, and is held 
 

----

484 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
down here and there by one stitch! The frequent occurrence of the checker- 
pattern, the so-called “fly” pattern” of the Lillooet, or the bead, spot, or 
snakeskin pattern of the Thompson Indians, is quite analogous to the rim 
patterns here described. In the area in which imbricated basketry occurs, the 
patterns which are characteristic of California and Oregon, and related pattern 
types, reach their most northern limit. In adapting these baskets to the 
characteristic coiled basketry in which decorative effects are brought about 
by weaving in strips of dyed material, the difficulty arose that single vertical 
and horizontal bands had to be made in colors. Since this would necessitate 
overlaying a considerable number of consecutive stitches with the weak-colored 
material, it became necessary to give to this strip a better hold, which is 
accomplished by catching the overlaid strip in cach new stitch, and bending 
  
  Fig. 200, a (5880), 4 (548s). Alaskan Baskets, Diameter of a, 19 cm. length of 4, 31 cm. 
it back over the stitch, — the method of imbrication. I venture to suggest 
the hypothesis that this contact between the northern weaving method and 
the southern patterns may have given rise to the technique of imbrication. 
The woven rim-decoration is presumably related to the woven quill-deco- 
ration of many of the Eastern baskets, the technique of which is quite similar 
to the one here discussed. It is also worth stating that the overlaying of 
coils which has here been described is the method adopted by the Koryak in 
decorating coiled baskets in continuous dark lines; the dark, overlaid ribbon 
being held by grass stitches (Fig. 213). The same method is also applied 
in decorating the rims of Amur River baskets (sce Fig. 216). It would 
seem, therefore, that this technique of decoration occurs over a large contin- 
uous area, extending from northeastern Siberia over northwestern America 
southward to the Lillooet region and the South Thompson River.? 
It is interesting to note that a number of birch-bark baskets collected   
10. T. Mason, Aboriginal American Basketry (Report of the U. S. National Muscam for 1902, Dp 434435) + See p. 208 of this volume, The name “fly-patiera” is sometimes also used by the Lower Thompson 3 The same method of decoration oecurs als in Japancse baskery, and it is used on the coiled baskets of the Somali. It is obvious, therefore, that not all baskets showing this decoration are derjved from the same source. 
   

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 485 
in eastern North America all have the bark cut in such a way that it runs 
at right angles to the rim. The modern bark baskets of the Chippewa and 
Ojibwa are cut in this manner; and a number of old baskets from the eastern 
parts of North Amer- 
ica found in the col- 
lections in the United 
States National Mu- 
seum at Washington, 
in the Peabody Mu- 
seum at Cambridge, 
Mass., and one owned 
by Mr. George G. 
Heye of New Vork City, all show this 
characteristic cut. For 
this reason the danger 
of the bark tearing 
out is not great, and 
the stitches along the 
rim are quite even 
and close together. 
The stitches used for 
sewing up the sides 
differ from the Alas- 
kan type. One of the 
well made specimens 
(Fig. 214, a) has seams 
overlaid with a strip of spruceroot, which 
is sewed on by means 
of the couching-stitch, 
and which recalls the 
overlaying of seams 
found in northeastern 
Siberia and in Alas- | 
ka. Another specimen 
(Fig. 214. 6) has the 
chain-sitch. A SImIar rig ue, os. Omamenal Spruce Rot Swing from Kins of Birch bark basket is in the col- Bushes (ater Mason). Central Alka. 
lection of the United States National Museum (Fig. 214, ¢), which is folded 
and sewed in nearly the same way as the one illustrated in Fig. 214, a. 
The specimen was among the effects of George Catlin, and was transferred     
    
  
  
      
  
     

----

486 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
with the Catlin portraits to the Smithsonian Institution. There is no infor 
mation regarding its provenience. While the Shuswap specimens before de- 
scribed are generally cut in such a way that the upper edge of the rim is 
concave on the long sides, that of the present specimen is convex. The rim 
of the basket is sewed with quills in red, dark-green, and natural color, 
also with strips of spruce-root. A small tray of similar kind, also from the 
Catlin collection and without spe- 
cial data, is shown in Fig. 214, 
d. The bark in this specimen 
all round is also sewed with even 
stitches, probably - because in by 
far the greater part of the tray 
the grain runs at right angles to 
the rim. On the bottom of the 
tray is a pattern representing a 
turtle and water-birds in light color 
on a dark background, but appar- 
Fe ot 10, Deo Be sng ads ently not formed by scraping. 
Hitched Stitch, Alaska. Leageh, 21.5 em. A similar tray from Massachusetts 
is in the collection of Mr. George G. Heye in New York, and still another 
one is in the collection of the Peabody Museum at Cambridge, Mass. 
Sewing with even stitches is also found on models of bark canoes, in 
which the grain of the bark runs at right angles to the gunwale. WIT igs 
Bam iw Rab       
              
  Fig. 213, a (x80), & (4B). Decoration from Rims of Paskets, Alsska. a, 4, About nat. size; ¥, § nat. sive, 
It is interesting to note that in parts of arctic Siberia the methods, of 
strengthening the rims of bark dishes are identical with the methods found in 
Alaska and British Columbia. Yukaghir bark dishes are folded and strength- 
ened in the same way as those previously described; but the strips of bark 
are generally long, and the grain runs parallel with the rim of the basket

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 487 
(Fig. 215). In the Amur River basketry the same device in stitching is 
employed as is found in northwestern America; and the method of strengthening 
the rim with a piece of birch the grain of which runs at right angles to the rim, is also found (Fig. 216). The elaborate decoration of the strengthening- 
piece, and the addition of a dyed strip which is caught under the longer stitches, are characteristic of this area. In a number of specimens from the 
Amur River the rim is strengthened by sewing the sides of the birch-bark basket to a wooden hoop. A bucket made in the same style from the 
Mackenzie River is in the United States National Museum. — Eprror.] 
Coiled basketry was formerly made by all or nearly all the Shuswap bands, and was of the same kind as that made by the Chilcotin, Lillooet, and Thompson Indians! On the whole, it may have been less fine than the best class of work done by the last-named tribe; but this may have been occasioned by the inferiority of the material 
used. Cedar-roots were employed where a good 
quality could be obtained; and this material 
was used quite frequently by the Lake division, who gathered it in the mountains some distance 
northeast of Canim Lake. As cedar was scarce in most parts of the country, the great major- ity of baskets were woven of spruce-root. The Fraser River bands, especially the southern ones, and the Lake people, were probably the greatest basket-makers; while the Kamloops and Bonaparte divisions made the fewest. The shapes of these baskets are said to have been the same as those of the Lillooet and Thompson baskets. 
In many Shuswap baskets there was a Fig. ais (sft). Korpak Basket straight rod sewed across the bottom to prevent Diameter, 15 cm. wear, but stiffening-rings made of rods were hardly ever attached inside the basket halfiway up, or along the outside of the rim, as seen in Chilcotin baskets. [Two baskets collected by Mr. Teit are oval in form, and do not have the tendency to angularity to which Mr. Teit refers (p. 477), and which is also found, although not quite so markedly, among the Chilcotin, Farther to the south, on Columbia River, the forms are throughout round. I am inclined to ascribe the angular forms, which are so little adapted to basketry, to an influence of the earlier use of boxes made of bent wood among the tribes of the Lower Fraser Canon and of the Lower Lillooet Valley, where this art scems to have been most highly developed, and possibly to an early 
      
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 187, 188.

----

488 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
use of bentbark boxes, such as are used by the Bella Coola and northern 
Kwakiutl tribes, although this type may itself originate from the sharp-edged 
bent-wood boxes. The coiled basketry of the interior resembles the Atha- 
pascan coiled basketry. It is worth remarking that in one of the two bas- kets collected by Mr. Teit (Fig. 217) a very regular and pretty effect is 
obtained by splitting cach stitch from the outside when sewing on the next 
    
      PN BR 
nn    
   i 
    Fig. 214, @ (19), 4 (97), ¢, d. Faster Birch-Back Vessels. (c, 4, from U. S. National Museum, Cat. Nos. 247163 and 73153) Height of a, h &, 14 cm, 16 em, 15.5 cm; diameter of 4, 23.5 om. 
following row. On the inside the effect is quite different, because none of the 
stitches, while the work is done evenly, is split. The same method is found 
in Athapascan baskets. The possibility of the relation of the fly-patterns to 
the Athapascan patterns has been discussed before. — Eprrox.]

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 489 
Basketry made with coils consisting of strips of sap was not manufac- 
tured. A few baskets were plain, without any ornamentation, probably owing 
to the difficulty of obtaining good straw and good bird-cherry bark for im- 
brication in some parts of the country. Straw for ornamentation was occasion- 
ally dyed red and yellow. The designs are said to have been the same as 
those found in Lillooet and Thompson baskets. The greater number were 
geometric, but realistic animal motives also occurred. 
About 1860, after the 
settlement of the country 
by the whites began, the 
Shuswap gradually gave 
up the making of woven 
baskets, until now it is a 
lost art in most bands. 
Some women of the Fraser 
River and Lake divisions 
still manufacture a few Fig, ar Vakaghis B baskets. The majority of Ig. 215 (pie). Vakaghic Tay. Length, 25 cm. 
the people use birch-bark baskets entirely, or buy woven ones from the 
Lillooet, Thompson Indians, and Chilcotin. The Sekanai Indians, who occupy 
        
Ri 
        Fig. 216, & (74), & (7h). Amur Basketry. Height, 20 my 13 cme 
the country just north of the Shuswap, are said to make woven spruce-root 
baskets, but T cannot say whether they are of the coiled type or not. 
Some large temporary baskets made of balsam, poplar, and spruce bark, 
were frequently used by the Shuswap for cooking berries, soaking skins, etc. 
They were barrel or funnel shaped, and roughly stitched with spruce-root. 
The smooth side of the bark was turned in. Open-work baskets like those

----

490 TEIT, THE. SHUSWAP. 
used by some coast tribes were not made. Needles and awls used in bas- 
ketry and mat making were kept in cases made of elk-antler. 
Weavixe. — Mats 
were not made as exten- 
sively as among the 
N Thompson tribe. Skins, 
NAAR \ and to some extent bark, ARVANA took their place. Never- theless almost every band 
made all the different 
kinds of rush, tule, and 
grass mats made by the 
Upper Thompson Indi- 
ans.! The southern Shu- 
swap made and used mats 
more extensively than the northern bands, and this was particularly true of 
the Bonaparte and Kamloops divisions. Stems of the squaw-grass, which is also used in basketry, alkaligrass, and other tall coarse grasses, were woven into small mats for drying berries on. Willow and 
other slender twigs were also sometimes woven into small mats 
for the same purpose. Woven bark mats, like those of the 
coast tribes,? were not made. i Bags and wallets were much in use. Some kinds were woven of bark twine, particularly among the southern bands, 
while those woven of thongs were more common in the 
north. Some were of exactly the same make as those 
made by the Thompson Indians. A very common form of 
bag was the carrying-bag * made of babiche from the hides 
of deer, caribou, and beaver. Bags of this kind are said 
to have been woven in the same way as nets, some having 
large and others small meshes. They varied considerably 
in size. Their use is now confined principally to the North 
4\ Thompson division. It seems, no wallets of the Sahaptin 
type! were made by the Shuswap. The various kinds of 
Nee 218 Gy 2%) bags will be more fully described on p. 496-498. 
16 my 122 om. Threads were spun on the naked thigh. The fibres 
were twisted into threads in one direction, and these were combined into 
  Fig. 217 (shfgh Coiled Basket. Length, 16 cm. 
   
a 
+ See Vol. 1 of this series pp. 188-190. + Ibid, Fig. 133, p. 191. * At 1 did not happen to sce any of these, I cannot say whether they are of the same kind as the car- tying and game bags made by the northern Athapascans, sod woven in the manner of foundation-coil. As these were formerly used by the Carrier, it seems probable that the § northern bands, would have them also. : +See Val. 1 of this series, Fig. 132, p. 190.   
   
  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 491 
three-stranded threads by twisting in the opposite direction. Some individuals 
were in the habit of doing it one way, and others the opposite way. Twine 
made of Indian-hemp bark was considered best for making nets and fish-ines. 
Netting-sticks for measuring the mesh, and netting-needles (Fig. 218) of wood, 
were used, at least in recent days. Net twine obtained from the whites is 
now chiefly used. Formerly large numbers of blankets were woven of rabbit, 
lynx, and other skins, in the manner of those of the Chilcotin and Thompson 
Indians. 
No blankets of goat'shair were made, as far as I could ascertain. 
Blankets and clothes woven of bark or of rushes were not often made. A 
few of the old-fashioned bags are still made by the Lake and North Thompson 
people, and the Bonaparte and Kamloops people still make a few mats. 
Black moss (dAlectoria) was not woven into blankets or clothes.

----

III. — HOUSE AND HOUSEHOLD. 
Hanrrations. — The description of the habitations of the Upper Thomp- 
son Indians’ applies equally to the Shuswap, and I will confine myself 
chiefly to the notice of such differences as I have discovered. All the bands 
except the Lake division and the Empire Valley band used underground houses 
in the wintertime! The four ‘rooms’ were sometimes named according to 
the four quarters, but other names were more generally applied. The upper, 
top, or head room was the name for the space next to the high land or 
mountain. It was generally the east, but sometimes the west room. The 
opposite room, next to the water or river, was called the “lower room, 
“kitchen,” or “storeroom ” and another, probably the most common, name for 
it, may be translated by the term *passing-place,” because people passed it 
on the way to the water. The space underncath the ladder was sometimes 
called the ‘under room; but the most general name for it is compounded 
with the suffix -akst, meaning ‘hand,’ and no doubt has reference to the 
person's hand being visible as he went up or down, holding the groove at 
the back of the ladder. This room was the north room in most houses. 
The remaining space opposite the foot of the ladder was called the *bottom 
room.” Houses among most of the bands were built so as to have a definite 
position in relation to the rivers, the beams being so adjusted and the ladder 
so placed that one of the sideroom spaces was next to the water. In the 
valleys this made the opposite room directly towards the rising ground, or 
mountains. The ladder was placed, if possible, in the northeast or northwest 
corner of the square entrance, leaning toward the north. In the main valleys, 
which nearly all run north and south, this was almost invariably the case. 
In the smaller valleys, which generally run at right angles to the larger ones, 
the ladder was nearly always made to lean east ward. 
The tops of many ladders were carved into a round knob or head, and 
the lower bands of the Fraser River division carved some of them into rude 
representations of bear and other animal heads. The Cadion division carved 
all their ladder-tops most claborately to represent the heads of bears, eagles, 
ravens, and many other quadrupeds and birds. They also painted them very 
gaudily. This was not donc altogether for ornamentation, but was supposed 
in some way to represent the inmates of the house, who claimed they be- 
¥See Vol. 1 of this tries, pp. 193-199. Both Alexander Mackensie and Simon Fraser describe underground houses which they saw (see Simon Fraser's Jounal, p. 16; see also p. 460, Footnote 1, of the present volume). In later times, winter houses were occasionally used also by the Lake division.   
   
[492]

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 493 
longed to these animals, or perhaps had them for their guardian spirits." 
No doubt the carvings here had something to do with the crests of Chilcotin 
clans or societies. Along parts of Fraser River where wood was scarce, 
the upright braces of the underground house were frequently made of drift- 
trees, with the root part adjusted to fit the rafters? Cellars were sometimes 
dug in the room next the water. 
The summer lodges were quite similar to those used by the Thompson 
Indians, and were covered with mats or bark. Circular lodges were the 
most common kind, especially in the valleys, and were almost invariably cov- 
ered with mats. They were the common lodges of the southern portion of 
the tribe; while the bark lodges were more common to the north and east, 
where the country was more thickly timbered. The bark lodges were square or oblong in shape, because the strips of bark were hard to fit properly on 
a conical lodge. The bark of black pine, spruce, balsam, or cedar, was 
used, — whichever was handiest or best in the neighborhood. It was put 
on in strips running up and down, with the sap side out, the strips slightly 
overlapping each other, and reaching up on cach side to a little above the cross-poless The poles at the ends of the lodge were generally filled in 
with brush and waste pieces of bark, although sometimes they were properly 
covered with sheets of bark, as on the sides. A pole was often placed along 
the base of the lodge at the side, and one or several lighter poles parallel 
to it above, to hold the bark in position, and keep the edges from curling 
up. Sometimes heavier poles placed up and down, and bearing on the 
seams, were used instead. In places where very long strips of bark could 
be obtained, they were laid up one side, across the top, and then down the 
opposite side, of the lodge. At the top they generally rested on a ridge- 
pole, which was placed there for the purpose. About the centre of the lodge, 
on cach side, short strips of bark were used, thus leaving a smoke-hole right 
above the fireplace. 
At fishing-resorts near the lakes or rivers, where large numbers of people 
congregated for a short time, and to accommodate people at feasts and pot- 
latches, long double lodges were built. All square lodges were of the types 
illustrated in Figs. 137, 138, and 142, in Vol. I of this series. Mats used 
for covering lodges were generally the tule tentmat? but other mats of 
rushes or grass were also used. Some families wintered in conical mat lodges, 
banking them up with earth, and covering them with double layers of mats. 
The smoke-hole of these mat lodges was closed either by two flaps made of 
"My informant, an old man, whose parents belonged to the Big Bar and Canoe Creck bands, gave me this information. He was only acquainted with the personal manitou, and knew nothing about clan-otems, crests, etc, which he could hardly comprehend. + See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 135, a and 4, p. 193. + Ibid, Fig. 137, p. 197. «Ibid, Fig. 142, p. 197. + Ibid, Fig. 131, ¢, p. 189.  

----

494 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
mats, which were attached near the top of the lodge, the free end being 
tied to a long pole, by means of which the flap could be turned back, in 
the same way as the flaps of the tepee of the Plains Indians; or, more 
commonly, by a single long mat, to each end of which a long pole was 
attached. This mat was placed around the smoke-hole on the wind side. 
If the full length of the mat was not required, the ends could be rolled 
around the poles. The framework of large circular lodges was generally 
constructed by first erecting four moderately heavy poles with forked ends, 
which were interlocked above the centre of the cleared lodge space, their butt-ends 
being extended to the edge of the cleared circle and placed at equal distances 
apart. To fill up the spaces between these, and to support the mats, about 
a score of lighter poles were placed around the edge of the circle with their 
small ends leaning against the interlocked tops of the main poles. 
Lodges were not covered with skins, which were too valuable; while 
bark and mats were of little value, and could be obtained plentifully almost 
anywhere. Besides, they answered the purpose quite as well, or better in 
some respects. A few of the Kamloops people occasionally used skin tents, 
which they procured in trade from the Okanagon. They would live in them 
for a month or so to show them off, and then cut them up and use the 
skins for other purposes. The Canim Lake band used oblong lodges and 
lean-tos made of bark almost exclusively. Very few mat lodges were used, 
and skin lodges and underground houses were not made at all? This may 
have been true of the whole Lake division. 
For hunting-lodges, especially on the lower grounds, round or square lodges, covered with mats, bark, poles, or brush, were used. Trapping-lodges, generally built near deerfences, were exactly like the Thompson hunting: 
lodge and were sometimes covered with earth to a height of about a metre. A few were of more pretentious type, like some of those used by the Lillooet.* 
In places where the party was liable to attack by an enemy. these lodges 
were made of horizontal logs interlocked like the logs of a log-cabin® They 
were chinked with moss, or were carth-covered up to a height of four or five feet, the rest being thinly covered with brush. Some small spaces were 
left open between the logs at a height of nearly two metres from the ground, 
and these were concealed by overhanging brush. They had only one entrance, which was guarded by a narrow zigzag approach built of logs or 
of stout poles set into the ground close together. 
In places where small black pine was plentiful, hunting and trapping   
For other styles of making thee lodges, see Vol. 1 of ths series, p. 1 xv, Figs, 1 and 2. Smaller lodges were oficner made like Fig. 141, p. 197, V £ See also p 460, Footaore 1, and p. 492. » See Vol. 1 of this series, p. 196. + See p. 15 of this volume. + See Vol. T of this series, p. 266, 267.     lio Fig. 140, p. 197; and Plate 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 495 
lodges were made in the style of a shelter or halflodge, and of the oblong 
lodge! and covered with poles running up and down. Occasionally they 
were made of the conical type, and sometimes had a double layer of poles 
running up and down all around. 
Girls’ lodges were always conical, and generally made of fir-brush, 
although bark and mats formed the covering of some. Women's lodges, 
during the fair weather, consisted merely of a shelter of mats, or of a 
small tent open on one side. They were just large enough to accommodate 
one person sleeping. If several women were to occupy them, they were 
made larger. 
In winter, tiny but permanent underground houses were used by the 
women for the purpose, and these corresponded in construction in every way 
to the large ones used. All the sweat-houses used by the tribe were exactly 
like those of the Thompson Indians! Those near villages were generally 
earth-covered. In places where suitable wands could not be obtained, they 
were made of short rods tied together at the tops like a tent! 
The most common cache, especially among the southern bands, was the 
circular cellar, as among the Thompson tribe. Probably they were most used 
in the south because of the dryness of the climate and the sandy nature of the 
soil. Fish and other food kept fresher in them than in any other kind of 
cache. The box-cache was also used extensively, and especially by bands 
inhabiting the more timbered parts of the country. It was the only cache 
which is said to have been proof against the attacks of the wolverene. 
Some of them were built on trees, but most were placed on a platform sup- 
ported by four posts. They were made of poles, were roofed with bark, and 
access to them was by means of an Indian ladder or notched log They 
were the same in every way as those obtaining among the Lillooet and Thompson Indians.” 
Scaffolds like those of the Thompson Indians’ were used at all the 
regular camps. Utensils, skins, ropes, saddles, etc., were placed on them to 
be out of the way of the dogs. 
Hunting-lodges are still used to some extent; and mat lodges may still 
be seen, principally among the North Thompson and southern divisions. 
Scaffolds, caches, and sweat-houses are in evidence almost everywhere, Tents 
of cotton drilling have nearly supplanted the summer lodges. The log-cabin 
  
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, Figs. 137 and 142, p. 197. # See Vol. 1 of this series, Plate xvit. + See Ehnographical Album of the North Pacific Coasts of America and Asia, Plate Xuiv. + See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 198, 199. + See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés (Transactions of the Canadian Institute, Session 1892-93, Fig. 185, p. 106). This representation of the Carrier cache is quite applicable to the Shuswap. Nearly every man, even in olden times, made bis cache slightly difirent in minor details. series, Plate av, Fig. 2, for a common present-day type. 15 and Plate xv, Fig. 1.   

----

496 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
commenced to take the place of the underground house long prior to 1858, 
for the tribe copied the houses of the Hudson Bay Company. Half the 
Shuswap tribe were living in cabins before the Thompson thought of erecting 
the first one. Nevertheless the houses in the Shuswap villages at the present 
time are not as good, on an average, as those of the Thompson Indians, nor 
are they usually kept as clean and tidy. The Shuswap villages, however, 
have the largest and finest churches of all the tribes in the interior. 
Hovuse-Furnistixes. — The household utensils and furnishings of the 
Shuswap were almost the same as those of the Thompson Indians. Hammocks 
were not used, except occasionally for very young children. Pillows generally 
consisted of a small heap of fine brush or grass placed under the end of 
the bedblankets. Bed or floor mats like those of the Thompson Indians were used. Skins of deer, sheep, goats, and bears, were much used for 
lying on. Blankets were often made of softened bearskins. Robes of fur, 
worn during the day, were also used for sleeping in. Table-mats like those 
of the Thompson tribe were used. Menstruating women sometimes ate out 
of birch-bark trays" of the kind used in the house as receptacles for berries, etc. Woven baskets were of all the shapes common among the Thompson 
tribe? and were used in the same manner. I did not hear of any flatbacked 
baskets being made or used. Round woven baskets, like those of the 
Lillooet * and Thompson Indians, were used for boiling food in. Birch-bark 
baskets were used for steaming food in, the top being covered with a bark 
lid, sometimes held down with a small stone. These baskets were round, 
with somewhat flaring sides, similar in shape to Fig. 200, a, but higher. 
Small quantities of certain roots were cooked in this fashion. Baskets so 
employed were almost round, and narrow-bottomed. Spruce and poplar bark 
baskets, and also some of birch-bark, made rather high, sometimes oblong, 
and with rather flat sides, were used near the fire for melting snow in, and 
keeping water warm, holding dye, skins, etc. Vessels for carrying and holding 
water were invariably of birch-bark. They were made very wrong, of the 
thickest bark, and some were of large size. They were of two shapes. One 
kind was rather round, deep, and straightsided, and chiefly used for carrying 
water. The other sort had a wide square bottom, which gradually narrowed 
to a very small round mouth (see Fig. 207). They were much used as water- 
receptacles in the house. Very similar to this kind, but having a wider mouth, 
was the water-basket nearly always used by adolescent youths and hunters. 
The last three kinds often had handles consisting of a single wooden rod placed 
across the centre of the mouth, and lashed to the rim, the upper part of 
the basket having an extra thickness of bark sewed to it all around for strength. 
  
1 See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 114, p. 123. 2 See Vol. L of this series, Figs. 143145, pp. 200, 201. * Ibid, Plate xx, Figs. 2 and 5.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 497 
Occasionally the rod was inserted through the basket just below the rim; and in this case two large extra pieces of bark, one on the outside and one 
inside, were sewed to the basket on each side, the ends of the rods passing 
through them. Sometimes a thick twisted picce of buckskin was used instead 
of a rod, and this was generally the kind of handle attached to the narrow- 
mouthed water-basket. 
Stilll another kind of birch-bark basket was invariably of small size, and 
used chiefly in berrying. Baskets of this kind varied somewhat in shape and 
in manner of stitching. Some were more round, and others more square. 
Some had the rims of equal height all round; but the most common kind 
had the rims lower on the sides, and higher, coming into a rounded peak, 
ES — 
| 
| | 
   
  I 
  Fig. 219 (siz). Woven Grass Bag. a, Front; & Back. Depth, 20.7 cm. 
on the ends (see Fig. 202)! Hoops around the mouths of baskets were 
generally put on the inside, but sometimes on the outside, and occasionally 
on both sides. Large baskets were sometimes strengthened by having thongs 
or ropes tied around them, forming a wide netting. Some baskets had 
handles consisting of two lugs or loops of hide, so that when full they could 
be lifted with both hands. Small baskets also had two loops, but merely 
for the auachment of the ends of the carrying-strap; the latter being just 
long enough to allow the basket to be carried on the elbow, although in 
some cases it was made of sufficient length to go around the shoulder. Many 
of the medium-sized baskets had three loops (like the woven baskets) for the 
  
1 See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 110, p. 120.

----

498 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
attachment of the tump-line, the ends of which went right around the carrying- 
basket. Very many bags and wallets of various kinds were used for many purposes, but the great majority of them were made of skins dressed with or without the hair. Bags woven of bark thread, elzagnus-bark, and grass, were used chiefly by the more southern bands. The common kinds were 
like those much in vogue among the Thompson tribe! They were often 
made of a picce of matting, which was turned over and sewed up at the 
sides. Woven barkestring wallets of the Nez Percés or Sahaptin type (Fig. 219), 
  Fig. 220, a (shy), 4 (sy) Rawbide Bags. Depth, 25 em. 23 cm. 
and rawhide or, buffalo skin bags (Fig. 220)’ were used almost altogether 
by the Kamloops and other southern bands, who procured them from the 
Okanagon. A very common bag used for holding awls, needles, and sewing- 
material, was made of a piece of dressed skin about 30 cm. long and 
15 cm. wide, to which on one side were sewed cross-picces forming pockets, 
one under the other! A kind of large bag used commonly by the Lake 
and North Thompson divisions was made of skins of caribou-legs, which   
+ See Vol. I of this series, Figs. 149, 150, p. 302. + See also Vol. 1 of ths series, Fig. 151, p. 203. 3 See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 138, p. 149.

----

Plate XIII Jesup North Pecific Expedition, Vol. IL 
  Towacco-Poucrs. 
The Shuswap.

----



----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 499 
were sewed together lengthwise and bound at the ends with a transverse 
strip of bearskin (Fig. 221). They were provided with a lacing, and were 
much used for transportation as well as for receptacles for clothes, etc., in 
the house. Another bag used for storing meat and fat was made of goat- 
skin. Other large bags used for this purpose were made principally of bear- 
skin and horseskin. Smaller hide bags (Fig. 222) were much used for 
holding food and sundries in the house. A very common form of bag, which to a great extent took the place 
of the baskets and parfleches used by the Thompson Indians, was the 
  Fig. 221 (348). Bag made of DecrLegs. Depth, 60 ca. 
carrying-bag already mentioned. Some were very large, and used for storing 
articles in the house or as panniers for packing on the sides of horses. 
They were made of deer, caribou, or beaver skins, which were soaked in 
water until the hair came out, stretched, and cut into strips and dried. The 
strips “in the small bags were very fine, and sometimes slightly twisted. 
Another bag of great importance was the tobacco-pouch (Plate xu1®), which was generally made of dressed skin, or, in more recent days, of cloth. 
Those of the Fraser River bands were somewhat square in shape, embroidered 
on one or both sides, and almost invariably had four single or double 
embroidered flaps hanging from the bottom. The style of tobacco-pouch 
most in vogue among the North Thompson band was of the Cree type 
see pe 40. :   
    3 Cat. No. girs Fig: 2 shies Fig. 3 sbi Fig 4 sls

----

500 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
(Plate xm, Fig. 2), while the southern bands used the various styles in use among the Thompson tribe and the 
Okanagon. They were the only bags 
among the Shuswap which were highly 
ornamented. Tobacco-pouches were 
also made of the scrotum of the big- 
horn sheep, the border being set with 
buckskin fringe. 
The use of stone mortars for 
grinding tobacco and paint has been 
mentioned. It scems that they were 
seldom used for other purposes, and 
were confined mostly to the Kamloops 
and Bonaparte divisions. 1 found only 
one old Indian who was positive that 
stone mortars, not the flat grinding- 
slabs, were made by the tribe. All 
the other Indians declared that they 
were made by Coyote in mythological 
times, and were occasionally found by 
     
  Fig. 233 (sity). Poste Leng, 52 cm. 
    Fig. 228, Ggh & Gite), Spoon. Length, 18 cm. 242 cm. Fig. 222 (gif) CanyingBag. Depth, 43 cm. 
the Indians in various parts of the Shuswap territory. It 
seems from this that they have not been generally made or 
used for a long time past. 
grinding tobacco was smaller than the ordinary pestle. The pestle used with them for 
Wooden 
mortars were also 
made occasionally. They were worked 
out of large knots 
of trees, and were 
also used for pound- 
ing tobacco. Other 
mortars hollowed 
out of smaller knots 
were used for paint- 
pots or for mixing 
ointment, and some 
of them were made 
quite thin and used 
as cups. 
Trays for hold- 
ing fish, etc.! were made of birch-bark; others, made of spruce and black-   
See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 116, p. 123.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 501 
pine bark, were used before the fire for catching fat-drippings. No wooden 
trays, buckets, or boxes were made or used. Pestles or mashers for berries 
were made generally of birch-wood, and were bottle shaped (Fig. 223). 
Spoons were made chiefly of mountain-sheep horn, but a few small ones 
were made of mountain-goat horn. Wooden spoons (Fig. 224) were seldom 
made, except by the Lake and North Thompson divisions. The lower bands 
on the Fraser River and the Bonaparte used some of Lillooet manufacture. 
Cups were made of birch-bark. Stirrers were made of wood, but many 
were of caribouantler, the wide palmeated part forming the stirring-end. 
Tongs, torches, slow-matches, and fire-drills were the same as those commonly 
used by the Thompson tribe. Dry grass, sage-bark, and teazed Indian-hemp 
bark, etc., were employed as tinder. Dry sand was often used in the holes 
of the firedrill. The latter went out of use soon after the introduction of steel 
and flint. Fire was sometimes started by putting bark tinder and a little 
gunpowder near the trigger of a flintlock musket. When the trigger was 
pulled, the sparks from the flint ignited the powder and the tinder, which 
were fanned into a blaze by blowing. 
Some of the spoons, bags, and baskets described above are still in daily 
use. Household utensils were hardly ever carved, painted, or decorated in 
any way.

----

IV. — CLOTHING AND ORNAMENTS. 
Cuotrixe. — Simon Fraser, in 1808, says of the Shuswap dress, 
“They dress in skins prepared in the hair’ (sce his Journal, p. 160). Again 
referring more particularly to those farther down Fraser River, he says, 
“They besmear their bodies with oil and red ochre, and paint their faces in 
different colors; their dress is leather” (p. 166). 
The dress of the Shuswap was similar to that of the Upper Thompson 
people. The former, however (especially the more northern bands), used more fur clothing. Many persons of the northern bands wore habitually fur 
robes without shirts, while among the Bonaparte and Kamloops divisions this was rare. Bark clothing was used to a very slight extent only, and among 
many bands not at all 
Some styles of clothing of the Thompson Indians, and some of their 
methods of ornamentation, were but little used among the Shuswap. 
Trousers, and combine dtrousers and breech-cloths, long leggings, and short 
leggings, were generally of buckskin, and made in the same manner as among 
the Thompson Indians. As a rule, they were devoid of decoration, excepting 
cut fringes, wich often ‘ran transversally across as well as up and down (Plate 
xiv! Fig. 1). In rare cases they were embroidered with quill-work along 
the seams. In later days the women's short leggings were generally made 
of cloth, and were beaded (Plate xiv, Figs. 2, 3). Buckskin jumpers and 
coats worn by the men were like those of the Thompson Indians? Shirts 
were made of dressed buckskin, elk-skin, caribou-skin, and moose-skin. They were made to be fastened with thongs on the shoulders or at the throat. 
Some had halflength and others full-length sleeves. Those of the men were 
short, and highly decorated with pendant feathers, dyed-hair tassels, and 
fringes of buckskin, human hair, and horsehair. Besides this, many were 
richly embroidered with quill-work. Women's shirts were longer and looser than those of the men, and were generally fastened with a belt around the 
waist. Most of them were of styles similar to those of the Thompson Indians, 
and were highly decorated with quills, shells, and elk-teeth. Some women's 
shirts had wide sleeves, and two flaps turned down from the neck, which 
reached to the middle of the chest and back respectively. These flaps were 
cut in various shapes, but most commonly they were square. They were 
  
Ei go Co Nols Fig 2 alts Fie 3 gifs; Fis 4 sie + See Vol. T of this series, Figs. 164, 165, p. 20 
sos

----

Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vel. IL Plate XIV. 
  Fig. 1. Fig. 4. Fig. 3 
LEGOINGS AND GARTER. 
The Shuswap.

----



----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 503 
fringed along the bottom, and ornamented with quills, beads, and shells. 
While the Shuswap decorated their shirts elaborately, other parts of their clothing were rather plain. 
Some men wore small dressed-skin ponchos and capes over their shirts, 
especially with those shirts which were fastened on the shoulders. Ordinary 
ponchos were made almost entirely of deerskins, and worn hair side out. 
Coyoteskin ponchos were used principally by warriors, while those of wolf: 
skin were worn only by shamans. Small fur ponchos or strips of fur, some- 
        A rem d 
fa BR    
      
         
Fig. 225, @ (531s), 4 (yify). Combination Suits, 
times woven, were used in the wintertime by some as neck-wraps; and in 
rainy weather a few people wore capes or ponchos of closely woven sage 
or elzagnus bark. 
Combination-suits were worn like those of the Thompson Indians. One 
of the latter (Fig. 225, a) consists of two leggings, made of bear-skin in front 
and of deerskin behind. They are set with a fringe of decrskin with the 
hair on, the fringe being on the outside of the leggings. The leggings are sewed in front to a narrow piece of marmotskin, which reaches up to a 
belt extending around the front of the body. Behind, the leggings are sewed 
to a piece of decr-skin, which extends around the back of the body, and at its upper corners is tied with buckskin-thong to the belt in front. Between 
the legs the deerskin is sewed for a distance of about three inches to the

----

504 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
‘marmot-skin in front, so that the leggings remain somewhat apart. A marmot- 
skin is sewed to the upper part of the belt with the hair side in. The head 
part of this skin is cut off, and the tail is left on at the upper end. Thus it 
forms a soft flap, which, when. the combination-suit is worn, falls down like 
an apron over the front of the garment. At the sides of the deer-skin, near 
the upper corners, a broad strip of buckskin is sewed on each side, which 
can be tied together in front, holding the suit firmly over the hips. 
The boy's combination-suit (Fig. 225, 4) is of similar cut. It consists 
of two leggings which are attached to strips of buckskin. These are cut 
out of one piece with a broad buckskin band which extends across the front 
of the body. To the ends of this, two pieces of soft fringed deer-skin are 
attached, by means of which the suit can be tied behind. To the middle 
of the band an apron made of marmot-skin is attached. Its lower part has 
a loop, which is evidently drawn up behind and fastened through the belt. 
The former of these specimens has red dots painted on the inside of 
the marmot-skin flap, while the other has designs in red painted on the 
parts made of buckskin. 
By far the most common robes were those of marmot-skins sewed together, 
and those of woven strips of rabbit-skins.! One of these marmot-skin robes 
(4%) has two rows of skins sewed together crosswise at the neck-piece. 
The upper row consists of three skins; the lower, of four skins. The outer 
skins of both rows are placed with the tailend outside, the tails being 
left on for ornament. The lower part of the robe consists of two rows of 
seven skins each, sewed together and to the two upper rows with tails 
downward. The tails of the lower row are left on. Most of the skins are 
sewed together so that the dark neck-piece is rounded off and fits in between 
the lighter hindlegs. Robes woven of strips of lynx-skin and of strips of 
musquash-skins were also quite common. Another common robe consisted of 
two large deersskins sewed together! Those of fawn-skins sewed together, 
and of beaver-skins, were fairly common. One specimen (;33;) consists of a 
number of skins of very young fawns placed transversely along the neck- 
piece; while the whole rest of the blanket consists of two rows, each of five 
or six fawn-skins running down vertically. 
Robes of dressed buckskin and elk-skin dyed red were used by a few 
people. Pictures and designs were scarcely ever painted on robes; but most 
robes were dyed red, including those dressed in the hair and woven of 
rabbitskins. Buffalo robes with the hair on were common, especially among 
the southern bands, who obtained them principally from the Okanagon and 
Thompson Indians. A few people of the Fraser River bands wore woven goat's-wool blankets, which were obtained from the Lillooet and Chileotin. 
  
* See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 131, £, p. 189. + Ibid, Plate xvii.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 505 
Old men often wore fur caps with the animals’ tails attached to the back 
for ornament. One specimen is made of the skin of a deer's head with ears, 
and four tail-feathers of the hawk are placed fan-shape standing up from the 
occiput, while behind each ear there is a tuft of fine breast-feathers. Caps. 
made of lynx, marmot, squirrel, and fox skins were the most common. Those 
made of the head-skins of deer! were much used in hunting. The majority 
of men wore head-bands, generally 
made of mink, marten, otter, or 
beaver skin. Many of these were 
set with feathers, and ornamented 
with strings of hair and dentalia. 
Warriors’ head-bands had two long. 
strings of hair or feathers hanging 
down, one on each side. Instead 
of two, sometimes a single one was worn hanging down the back or attached 
to one side. The manner of attaching the feathers was the same as among 
the Thompson tribe. Eagle-feathers were highly prized. 
Mittens of fur were used in the wintertime, and were suspended by 
strings from the shoulders. Socks consisted generally of pieces of skin worn 
fur side in. Sometimes they were sewed up at the toe, and the heel left 
open, like those of the Thompson 
Indians. Others were woven of sage- 
bark or elzagnus-bark in the form of 
a slipper? Many people used instead 
a loose padding of caribou-hair or of 
dry grass inside their moccasins. Moc- 
casins were made of dressed skins of 
deer, caribou, elk, and moose. Most 
of them, especially those of the women, 
were made plain; but sometimes they 
were more or less embroidered with 
quills and dyed horsehair. They were 
of four types. Probably the most 
common kind were those with cross- 
cut toe (Fig. 226), like the common Fig. 227 (sida). Sedgebark Shoe. 
kind in use at the present day. Nearly as common were those with round 
toe! Somewhat less common were those with pointed toe sewed down the 
instep to the toes along the middle of the foot Fairly common were those 
with sole sewed to the upper all round the foot. The upper consists of 
  Fig. 226 (sity). Moccasin. 
    
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 178, p. 213. * Ibid, Fig. 174, p. 212. * Ibid. Fig. 170, p. 210. « 1bid., Fig. 172, p. aun,

----

506 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
a single piece, with a rather long tongue on the instep. The sides of the 
upper are sewed up in a vertical seam on the heel. To the upper is 
attached a leg-piece like those of the Thompson Indians! In some bands 
this was a very common style, while other bands seldom used them. A few 
people of the southern bands wore moccasins sewed on one side, like the 
most common kind used by the Thompson tribe.” All or almost all moccasins 
had trailers of four main types, like the second, fourth, sixth, and seventh 
in the series of sketches of Thompson trailers! Hunters in cold snowy 
weather used long boots or combined moccasins and leggings of sheep or 
deer skin. They were worn hair side out, over the ordinary shoes and 
leggings. On such occasions very poor 
people wore high shoes woven of sage-bark 
or of rushes (Fig. 227). 
Belts, hair-ribbons, and garters (see Plate 
xiv, Fig. 4) were used, and were of many 
different styles. Some of these were embroi- 
dered and ornamented with tassels, teeth, 
feathers, etc. 
Breech-cloths were of soft dressed skin, 
made in styles similar to those in vogue 
among the Thompson Indians. Probably the 
most common kind used by men consisted 
of a strip of buckskin about 30 cm. wide 
and 1.5 metres long, the ends of which were 
Whi drawn under the belt and allowed to hang 
down like an apron before and behind. The 
lower end in front was often decorated with 
holes, and the bottom edge was cut in points. 
Young women wore headbands of dressed 
skin, which were generally sewed behind,® 
and the ends cut into a fringe which was sometimes long enough to reach 
down the back. These headbands were embroidered with dentalia. Older 
women used buckskin caps which were frequently beaded or worked with 
quills along the scams! and sometimes had a: bunch of fringe at the top. 
Children, as a rule, wore capes instead of robes. The capes often had 
buckskin fringe all around neck, front, and bottom, and were open in front. 
They were generally of marmot, ground-squirrel, or of squirrel skins. 
Aprons worn by old men and women were made of skins of all kinds, and 
  Fig. 228 (aff). Woven Cap. 
  
See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 170, p. 210. * Ibid. Fig. 169, p. 210. + Ibid, Fig. 173, p. 211. 4 See decoration on buckskin shir, Ibid, Fig. 163, p. 207. + See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 193, p. 215. “Ibid, Fig. 190, p. 217. Ibid, Fig. 195, p. 317.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 507 
some were of woven material like the robes. Those of the men were cut in three different shapes, — almost square, rectangular and about twice as 
long as wide, and tapering towards the lower end. Women's bodices or 
kilis ‘were of dressed skin with a long fringe at the bottom. Some were 
high-bodied like a sleeveless shirt, and fastened over the shoulders; while 
others were low, and fastened around the waist! The latter were the most 
common. Short sleeves fastened above the elbow were worn with the 
widessleeved shirt by a few women. The poorest people wore robes, capes, 
and aprons of dogskin, and leggings, kilts! ponchos! and caps’ (Fig. 228) 
of woven sage-bark among the more southern bands, and of woven rushes 
among the other bands. A pair of sedgebark leggings (;1%;) of this kind 
are made in twined weaving like the socks of the same material worn by 
the Thompson Indians.® The top is trimmed with a strip 
of soft rabbitfur, which is tumed over the edge. The 
lower part is loose, like the heel of the Thompson 
sock. Near the lower part, straw braid is attached to the 
front, by means of which the legging can be tied up below 
the knees. Willow and cedar bark were very rarely used 
materials. Along Fraser River, and possibly in a few 
other parts, poor people wore sandals and moccasins of 
sturgeon-skin. The latter were painted with red ochre. 
The sandals consist of a flat piece of skin wider at the 
heel than at the toe. Near the edge on cach side there 
was one slit in the middle of the long side of the sandal, 
and through these slits a string made of hemp-thread is 
pulled, passing along the bottom of the sandal. Another pair of holes is made halfway between the pair just described 
and the farthest point back, and through these holes a 
similar string is passed. Presumably the sandal was attached 
by tying these strings crosswise. The sandals were made 5% 72 Ne 
thicker and more durable by applications of glue mixed of en. 
with small feathers and sand. As articles of clothing were sometimes bartered from tribe to tribe, or won in games when members of one tribe gambled with those of another, skin garments of Thompson, Okanagon, and Kootenai manufacture were occasionally found among the Shuswap. In this way Cree 
      
See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 185, p. 216. * Ibid, Fig. 186, p. 216. 2 1bid., Fig. 196, p. 219. “In the Thompson specimens collected by Mr. Teic is one cap made of double-twisted Indian hemp thread (righ The cap looks very much like a round basket, the single threads being coiled and sewed together with cotton thread. Outside it is painted with rows of sanding triangles. The whole specimen looks very much as though it were an imitation of a basket-cap similar to those of the Oregon and California tribes. The irregular and rough sewing-together of the threads in the form of coils seems to be simply a device to hold together the materia, the knowledge of the older type having disappeared. 1 do mot know similar technique in old specimens from this region. This style of cap is said to have been fairly common. — EDITOR. + See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 174, p. 212.       
   

----

508 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
clothing was not uncommon on the North Thompson River, and women 
could be seen wearing the old-fashioned Cree shirt with separate sleeves. 
I may here mention the lasts or boards (Fig. 220) used for shaping and 
stretching moccasins. The moccasins were dampened with water; and smooth stones, like large flakes of jasper with rounded surfaces, were used for 
pressing the skin into proper shape along the edges of the boards. Special 
knives were used for cutting skin (Fig. 230). Awls for sewing clothes were 
of various kinds, but the favorite kind was made of the penis-bone of the 
black bear. Those made of the leg-bone of the deer were also commonly 
in use! 
Nearly all the different articles of clothing referred to have gone out 
of use. Moccasins, fur and buckskin gloves, and mittens, are still common. 
Fringed buckskin trousers, chaperos, coats and jackets, and fur caps, may 
still be scen occasionally. Among the North 
Thompson division, embroidered leggings and fur 
cloaks are sometimes used. Marmot.skin robes are still 
fairly common among the Lake and North Thompson people. After trading commenced with the fur 
companies, leggings of blue and red 
to take the place of those of skin. WI 
woollen blankets largely took the place of the robes. 
Blankets were cut up and made into shirts, coats, 
mittens, and sock-picces. Colored woollen sashes 
took the place of belis. After the coming of the 
= miners and the opening of trading-stores in various 
Fig. 230 (ify). Knife or cuing places, these garments in turn gradually disappeared 
Skin Leng 117% 4g completely as those they had superseded; and 
their place has been taken by woollen and cotton socks, blue jean overalls, 
cotton shirts, cloth coats, vests, and cowboy hats, among the men, and by 
calico dresses, woollen shawls, and silk handkerchiefs for the head, among 
the women. Decoration oF Croruine. — Ornamentation of buckskin clothing was 
with fringes, pinking, and perforations, as among the Thompson tribe.! 
Painting of clothes in any manner was rare; but the dyeing of dressed skins 
to be made into clothing, and of robes, ctc., was very common. The common 
color was red, but yellow was also used. Originally all embroidery was 
wrought with porcupine and bird quills, in red, white, yellow, and black 
colors. Bird-quills to be used for embroidery were split, fattened, and 
scraped, and then split into strips of the desired width. Dentalium-shells 
and elk-teeth were very much used for decorating clothing. Elkteeth were 
        
  
1 See Fig. 35, p. 171 of this volume. © See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 221, 322.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 509 
often séwed along scams. Sometimes they were scattered all over the garment 
in the same way as painted spots on robes. Feathers were also much in 
vogue for attachment to head-bands, shirts, robes, etc. 
Tail-feathers of eagles were very valuable for decorative purposes. 
Adult eagles of dark plumage, with white tail-feathers tipped with black, 
were most valuable, four of their tailfeathers being worth a large dressed 
beaverskin. On this account they were much sought after. Tassels of human hair and of elk-hair dyed were also used. Copper, bone, and quill 
tubes were not uncommon, and were strung like dentalia. Wampum or flat 
disk-shaped beads of shell and bone were not used as much as among the Thompson Indians. After the introduction of horses, horsehair in four colors 
came largely into use. Soon after trading commenced with the fur companies, 
in the carly part of the last century, colored glass beads of various sizes 
gradually but eventually completely superseded quills in embroidery. They 
also, on most garments, supplanted dentalia, wampum, and elk-teeth. Later, 
colored yarn, ribbon, and braid superseded decoration with hair and feathers. 
About this time colored yarn tassels in the shape of round balls (see Plate 
xiv, Fig. 4) came into vogue. These, at the present day, are common in 
the decoration of the Carrier, and are to be seen on nearly all their tobacco- 
pouches. However, this kind of tassel was never much in vogue among 
most Shuswap bands. It seems to have been introduced by the Cree. After 
white settlement commenced in the country (about 1860), colored silk thread 
gradually displaced beads in embroidery, and the latter are now seldom seen. 
PERsoNAL ADORNMENT. — In the adornment of their persons, the Shuswap 
differed in very few details from the Thompson people. Ear-ornaments were 
made of dentalia, beads, copper, teeth, and bone. They were worn by both 
sexcs, and were in all respects like those of the Thompson Indians. The 
most common kind were made of dentalia and beads.! Stout bird-quills were 
often used in place of dentalia. They were scraped a little to make them 
transparent, and stuffed with dyed material, — white, black, red, yellow, 
green, or blue. Bird-down, ‘shredded bark, wool, and hair were used for this 
purpose. Sometimes the quills themselves were dyed. The quills were 
strung on thread, like dentalia. Necklaces of various lengths were also worn 
by both sexes. They were made of dentalia, bird quills and feathers (dyed 
and undyed), animal teeth and claws, bone tubes and beads, copper tubes, 
wampum beads, and in later days glass beads. Elzagnussceds were also 
sometimes used. Only shamans wore necklaces of grisly-bear claws. Some necklaces were worn tight around the throat,! and were made of buckskin 
padded with deerhair. They were embroidered with beads or quills on one 
side only. Bone and copper pendants, round, square, oblong, crescent-shaped, 
  
+ See Vol 1 of this series, Fig. 195, p. 222. # Ibid, Fig. 200, p. 223

----

510 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
and triangular,’ were worn on the chest, generally attached to necklaces. Some 
of the largest ones were worn separately. A few of the bone ones had 
incised designs filled in with red paint. They were flat, and generally 
polished. Abelone or haliotis shells were not used. The Fraser River bands 
Sometimes obtained abelone-shells from the Lillooet, Chilcotin, and Carrier, 
but these were generally kept as curiosities. 
Noscornaments were worn by almost all women and by a very few 
men. They were made almost always of dentalium-shells? and had pieces 
of the scalp of the red-headed woodpecker attached to cach end. Polished and incised bone rods of equal thickness at both ends were used occasionally 
as noscornaments. At each end a depression was made, into which a red- 
headed woodpeckers scalp was glued. Some of them were made smaller at 
one end! where they were perforated, and could then be used as car-pendants 
if desired. Quills were occasionally used as nose-ornaments, principally by 
children. Some dentalium-shells used as ear-pendants had incised designs. Noserings of horn or metal, labrets, and rings for the ankles, were not 
used. After the advent of the fur-traders, bracelets and finger-rings of brass 
and copper came into common use. Some head and breast ornaments were 
made of dentalia strung on buckskin thongs and combined into a single piece 
(some close-fitting necklaces and bracelets were made in this way). Others 
were made of a stiff piece of buckskin which was thickly covered with 
dentalia sewed in rows. The breast-pieces varied in size from about 12 cm. 
or 15 cm. square to large ones reaching almost: from the throat to the belt.) 
They were worn mostly by men. All these ornaments have long been 
out of use. Formerly much attention was paid to the hair, and there were at least 
four ways of dressing it. The most common method for both sexes was to 
part the hair down the middle, and gather it into a single braid on cach 
side. If the hair was very abundant, it was made into two braids on cach 
side. Women fastened the ends of their braids together at the back, while 
the men allowed theirs to hang down at the sides. Some men parted their 
hair nearly on one side of the head, instead of in the middle; and a very 
few divided theirs on both sides, the remaining hair on the top of the head 
being tied up in a knot or made into a small queue, the end of which protruded 
over the brow. A common style was to cut the front hair all around the 
brow a little above the eyebrows, the rest of the hair being done up in 
queues, tied up loosely, or gathered in a knot at the back of the neck. In 
this method there were two partings of the hair in the shape of a T, or 
only one across the head, instead of down the middle. Warriors and   
+ See Vol. I of this series, Figs. 363 367, pp. 424 426. + Thid., Fig. 197, p. 223. + Ibid, Fig. 198, p. 233. * Ibid, Fig. 379, p. 431. + See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, p. 174.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. str 
pubescent lads tied their hair in a knot behind the head, while maidens fixed theirs in a knot behind each car. Some warriors did up their hair in 
stiff “horns,” like the Thompson Indians.) Combs and scratchers were often 
worn stuck into the knots of the hair. The hair was washed occasionally in 
tepid water with birchleaves or urine, and was always dressed once a day, 
except by men on hunting-trips. Hair was oiled with tallow from the deer’s 
back, sheep's fat, and sometimes with bear-grease and salmon-oil. The 
partings of the hair were always painted red, and sometimes the cycbrows 
as well. The Thompson Indians are said to have had more styles' of 
dressing the hair than the Shuswap. Buckskin flaps (Fig. 231) of various 
kinds, richly embroidered with quills or shells, 
and often provided with numerous pendants, 
were worn by both sexes, attached to the hair 
on each side of the head. The beard was 
eradicated with the finger-nails, friends pulling 
out cach others’ beards. Tweezers were not 
common until the advent of iron, although 
copper ones were made occasionally. Young men 
and young women plucked their eyebrows to 
make them narrow, and also plucked the hair- 
line to make it high and eradicate all stray hairs. 
The face, and sometimes the body also, was 
painted every day. Women generally painted 
the face red or yellow. Men usually painted 
theirs red or brown, but sometimes also blue, 
yellow, and white. Micaceous hematite was 
much used. Black was used only by warriors and shamans. Paint was put on dry, or more 
generally was mixed with grease. The materials 
from which paints were made have already Fig. a5t (sik). HairOmament. 
been mentioned. The men and a few women Height, 255 cn. 
painted their faces in many curious designs representing their dreams (see 
Figs. 253-257). 
Tattooing was not very common. Although tattoo-marks were put on 
at about the age of puberty, it is claimed that they had no connection with 
the ceremonies at that time performed, and were made solely for ornamenta- 
tion, Tattooing was done mostly on the backs of the wrists of both sexes, 
and was produced by pricking or cutting over the painted parts, and by 
drawing a needle with stained thread underneath the skin. Some people of 
both sexes tattooed the face also. Women had perpendicular lines on the 
    
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, p. 226.

----

512 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
chin and brow: for instance, one vertical line running down the chin from ench 
corner of the mouth, and one down the middle of the chin; or double lines 
in the same position; or, in addition to these, a double line running vertically 
between the eyebrows. Men also had lines on the chin. 1 could not obtain 
any meaning for these. Men also tattooed a number of radiating lines on 
the checks or chin, which were called the ‘eagle's tail” 
For instance, five lines running down the chin — the two 
outer ones diverging downward from the corners of the 
mouth, the three inner ones placed at equal distances 
between these — represented the eagle's tail. The same 
design was executed by seven diverging lines, beginning 
at the middle part of the lower lip, and extending downward 
and outward along the chin. The same design was placed 
on the checks, the lines beginning at the cheek-bone and 
diverging outward towards the ears. Another pattern used 
by men consisted of a halfcircle on each check, extending from near the 
bridge of the nose to the chin (Fig. 232). I did not obtain any name for 
this mark among the Shuswap, but the Thompson Indians call it the 
“rainbow.” The eagle-tail design was 
confined principally to the Kamloops 
people. Face-tattooing has been out of 
fashion for a long time, but the wrists 
are still tattooed occasionally. Tattooing 
was very common among the Carrier. 
Combs! were exactly like those of 
the Thompson tribe. They were made 
of wild-gooseberry wood, but the wood of 
Philadelphus Lewisii Pursh (wa'xaselp) 
was preferred when it could be obtained. 
Fig. 233, a (s}12), # (sify). Combs. Length, Sometimes this wood was procured from 
03 mo 132 en the Lillooet. The Fraser River bands 
occasionally made combs from single thin pieces of birch and juniper wood 
(Fig. 233), like those in vogue among the Chilcotin and Carrier. ~Birch-leaves, 
children’s urine, and a kind of clay or washing-soda obtained from certain 
lakes, were used in water as soap. 
The ideas of personal beauty were the same as among the Thompson 
Indians,* the only difference being that short women were considered prettiest. 
In fact, the taller a woman was, the uglier she was considered. 
  Fig. 232. Tattooing. 
   
  
See Vol. 1 of this serie, Figs. 201-203, p. 224. 5 Ibid. p. 229.

----

V. — SUBSISTENCE. 
VaieTies AND PREPARATION oF Foon. — The Shuswap may be classed as a hunting and fishing tribe; the former occupation, on the whole, 
predominating. The Fraser River and Cafion bands were the most sedentary, 
the latter almost entirely so; while the North Thompson bands were the most 
nomadic. Salmon was of greatest importance to —— the Fraser River and Cafion people, trout and = 
small fish to the Lake people, and game to the 
rest of the tribe. Fishing, however, was of great 
importance to every band. In comparison with 
the Thompson tribe, the people as a whole depended 
less on salmon, and more on small fish and game. 
The meat on which they lived was of impor- 
tance in the following order: deer, elk, caribou, 
marmot, sheep, hare, beaver, grouse, bear, moose, 
duck, goose, crane, squirrel, porcupine. Goat- 
meat was not eaten by most bands, except when 
other meat could not be obtained. Turtle was 
eaten by the North Thompson people. Moose 
were found only in the extreme northeast hunting- 
grounds. Buffalo and antelope did not inhabit 
the tribal territory, but they were known, and a few Shuswap had hunted them east of the Rocky 
Mountains. Elk became practically extinct about 
fifty years ago, and were scarce seventy years ago. 
At one time they formed the chief object of the chase 
with many bands, as they were easy to hunt, and 
their flesh and skins were most highly esteemed. 
The general introduction of fire-arms among the 
Indians led to their gradual extinction. Caribou 
have also disappeared from the southern parts of      the Shuswap country, and are now found only in Fi& 234 (rife) KeerDigger 
the north and east. Length, 07 cm. } 
The fish-supply consisted of salmon of four or five varieties, sturgeon, 
and trout and whitefish of several varieties; but almost every kind of fish 
was eaten. Fresh-water clams and other shell-fish, which are found in some 
lakes, were never eaten, except perhaps in cases of famine. 
{s13]

----

514 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Roots and berries formed an important part of the food-supply, and the 
latter were gathered in great quantities. Roots were not so important as 
among the Thompson Indians. The most common kind of root-digger was 
made of serviceberry wood, and had a handle of birch-wood.! A few 
handles were made of antler and of goathorn; but those of the style called bow-handles made of mountain-ram’s horn, and common among the Thompson 
and Lillooet tribes, were not used. Some root-diggers, generally shorter 
than the wooden ones, were made of caribou, deer, or elk antler, in a single 
piece, and were similar to those used by the Chilcotin (Fig. 234). 
Most of the roots found in the Thompson country also grew abundantly 
in the southern parts of the Shuswap country, but in the more northern 
parts many kinds common in the south did not grow. Thus in the grounds 
of some bands not over five or six kinds of edible roots were found, while 
in those of others as many as fifteen kinds might be obtained. The roots 
of the following plants were those most commonly uses 
    1. Lilium Columbianum. ‘The largest roots of these were obiained in the Horsefly District. 2. Claytonia sp. (probably Clayionia sessilifolia). 
3. Allium sp. (probably Allium cermuum). 
4 Potentitla sp. (probably Potentitla anserina), 5. Ferula dissoluta. The roots of this plant are of three varieties, each having a different name. 6. Erythronium grandfiorum, var. minor. 7. Atama’ts (probably a kind of wild jarsnip). 8. Calechortus macrocarpus. 9. Peucedanum macrocarpum 10. yanexain. 11. Kalspe/, a variety of thistle (the name of the plant is kalspd’; that of the root, npa’pokxen). 12. Balsamorhiza sagittata. Confined to the southern parts of the country. 13. Tet, a root suid to resemble No. 8. Confined to the southern parts of the country, chiefly Kamloops and lower Thompson River. 14. Hydrophyllum occidentale. Confined to the southern parts of the country, chiefly Kamloops and Lower Thompson River. 15. Lewisia rediviva. Confined 10 the southern pars of the country, chiefly Kamloops and Lower Thompson River. 16. Sxala’uxia. Confined to the lower parts of the country, chiefly Kamloops and Lower Thompson River. 17. Camassia esculenta. Confined to the southern parts of the country, Columbia River Valley. 18. Fritillaria lanceolata. 
It is said that fern-roots were not eaten, although abundant in some 
parts of the country. 
The following kinds of wild fruits were used: — 
1. Serviceberry (dmelanchicr alnifolia). This was the most important frit, and at least four varieties of it were recognized. 2. Soapberry (Shepherdia canadensis), probably next in importance to the preceding.   
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 212, a, p. 231. © Ibid, Fig. 212, 4, p. 231.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 515 
3. Blueberry (Vaccinium myrtilius, var. microphylla), two or more varieties. 4. Blueberry (Vaccinium membranaceum). 5. Choke-cherry (Prunus sp). Two varieties were recognized. 6. Raspberry (Rubus 5p.). 7. Thimble-berry (Rubus sp). 8. Blackberry (Rubus sp). 9 Gooseberry (Ribes sp.), two kinds. 0. Currant (Ribes cereum or Ribes Hiudsoniamwm Rich). Confined to the extreme southem part of the country. 11. Strawberry (Fragaria Californica). 12. Flderberry (Sambucus canadensis), of local occurrence. 13. Hawberry (Crataegus rivularis Nut), of local occurrence, and not much used. 14. Bitter-berry (Cornus sp) 15. Bearberry (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi). 16. Cranberry (Viburnum sp.), two varieties. Confined to the cool, moist Jarts of the country. 17. Oregon grape (Berderis sp). Not much used. 18. Roseberry (Rosa gymnocarpe Nut). These were only used in times of great scarcity of other kinds of food. 
Berries were gathered in the same way as among the Thompson people, 
a large and a small basket being used. Wooden combs were made use of 
for gathering the small blueberries. Bark trays (see Fig. 206, p. 482) were often 
utilized for collecting cranberries and soap-berries, especially late in the fall, 
when the berries were very ripe and at their sweetest, and the leaves had partly fallen from the bushes. The branches were simply shaken above the trays. 
A good deal of black moss (Alectoria jubata) was eaten, and mushrooms 
of at least one kind. Cactus (Opuntia sp.) was much used by the southern 
bands wherever it grew. Wild celery was confined to the extreme south, 
and therefore not much used. Stems of Balsamorrkiza were not eaten except by some people of the southern bands, and the seeds were not used 
except perhaps by a few of the Kamloops people. Stems of fireweed 
(Epilobium angustifolium) were rarely eaten, but the stems of the wild 
rhubarb (Heracleum lanatum) were very much used. 
The cambium layer of the black pine (Pinus contorta, Doug.) was in 
great demand; but that of the alder, balsam-poplar, birch, fir, and spruce, 
was not used. The cambium of the yellow pine (Pinus ponderosa) was used 
by the Bonaparte and Kamloops people, and that of the aspen (Populus 
tremuloides) and the “nut pine (Pinus albicaulis) were occasionally used. 
Hazelnuts were used principally by the North Thompson people, who 
sold them to other bands. Nutlets of Pinus albicaulis were gathered, and 
those of Pinus ponderosa were also used by the Bonaparte and Kamloops 
people. 
Tea made from the leaves and stems of ‘the Hudson Bay plant’ was 
used as a drink. Bark was stripped off trees with bark-peclers made of 
antler (Fig. 235, a. 6). A few of these were made of wood and horn. Sap- 
scrapers (Fig. 235, ¢) were generally made of caribouantler or of the

----

516 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
shoulder-blade of the black bear. A few were made of other bones, notably 
the ulna of the deer. They were similar in form to those used by the 
Thompson Indians, Cree, Chilcotin, and Carrier. Many of them were double- 
ended. Those used for the cambium of the yellow pine were knife-shaped, 
and made from rib-bones of various animals. 
The methods of preparing and preserv- 
ing the different kinds of roots and berries 
were the same as those practised by the 
Thompson tribe. Mats of all kinds, but 
especially tent-mats, were used for drying 
berries on. About half the harvest of 
service-berries and soapberries was boiled 
and made into cakes! and some of the 
raspberries and blackberries were treated 
in like manner. Instead of large woven 
baskets, temporary baskets were often used 
for boiling. These were made of spruce- 
bark, and were cylindrical in shape. Bark 
trays were sometimes used in conjunction 
with them? The cakes of berries were 
spread on layers of leaves, dry pi 
or dry grass, supported on sticks: more generally they were laid on mats 
woven of willow-twigs or of grass, made 
for the purpose. Frames woven of slats 
of wood * were used by a few people 
Nearly all roots were tied in strings 
or threaded on strings before cooking in 
the earth ovens. Roots of the wild potato 
(Claytonia) and the lavender lly (Cale- 
chortus macrocarpus) were not generally 
cooked in these ovens, but threaded on 
strings and hung up to dry, or were spread 
loosely on mats to dry. Afterwards they 
Fig, 255, « (elfeh # Gio) Burpee; Were put in sacks or baskets, and cooked © (gif), SspScraper. Length 49 cm. 44 cm, in small quantities, as required, by boiling 
am in the manner of potatoes. lt was con- 
sidered preferable, however, to steam them, as then they did not get so      
  
T of this series, p. 235. the manner shown in Fig. 119 of Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés. + See Vol. 1 of ths series, Fig. 215, p. 235.    
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 517 
watery. Round birch-bark baskets with flaring sides were used as kettles. The basket was filled nearly half full of boiling water. About halfway 
down the basket, a little above the surface of the water, a framework of 
twigs or small sticks, fastened together in the manner of spokes in a wheel, 
was placed, with the ends resting on the sides of the basket. On this was 
spread a thin layer of grass, upon which the roots were heaped and covered 
with a close-fitting lid or sheet of bark. The basket was then set near the 
fire. Small hot stones were dropped into the water if necessary. As these 
roots were small, they did not take long to cook. At the present day a 
lard-tin is used instead of a bark kettle, and placed on the stove; so that 
the water continues to boil and the volume of steam is kept up. 
The above remarks in regard to the steaming of these roots are also 
applicable to the Thompson Indians. Salmon and other fish were prepared 
and cured in the same manner as among the Thompson tribe. 
Salmon-roe was wrapped in bark and buried; and salmon-oil was stored 
in bottles made of fish-skins, which were sealed with twine and glue. Meat 
was also prepared and cured in the same way as among the Thompson 
Indians. Marrow was stored in bladders of the deer and caribou. Caribou 
and deer tongues were split and dried. Beaver-tails were also thus treated 
occasionally. 
Five methods of drying meat and fish were in use, — by the sun's rays; by wind, in the shade; by smoke, in the lodges; by heat from the 
fire; by hot air, in the sweathouse or in houses constructed like a sweat- 
house, but larger. The last method was used when meat had to be dried 
quickly. Horse-meat was at one time much used, but has now fallen quite 
into disuse. Dogs were caten only in times of great want. Limited quantities 
of these varieties of food ‘are still used; but in most bands they are only supplementary to potatoes, flour, rice, beans, etc., which now compose the 
staple articles of diet. Salmon, however, is still of some importance along 
Fraser River. Many families of the Lake division still subsist largely on 
trout, and some of the Upper North Thompson people still live mostly 
on game. 
Seasons. — The Shuswap recognize five seasons, corresponding exactly 
to those of the Thompson Indians. The months have two classes of names. 
They are called “first month.” “second month,” “third month,” and so on; or 
they are called by recognized names derived from some characteristic. The 
names of the moons among the Fraser River division, and their special 
characteristics, are as follows: — 
First Moon, or Pelxaluxten (‘going-in time’). — People commence to 
enter their winter houses. The deer rut. 
Second Moon, or Pestit¥’qem. — First real cold. 
Third Moon, or Pelkutlami'n. — Sun turns.      
   

----

518 TELT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Fourth Moon, or Peska'pts (spring [winds] month”). — Frequent Chinook winds. The snow begins to disappear. 
Fifth Moon, or Pesci'xem ([little] summer [monthf). — Snow disap- 
pears completely from the lower grounds. A few spring roots are dug, and 
many people leave their winter houses at the end of the month. 
Sixth Moon, or Peltekefiaiten. — Snow disappears from the higher 
grounds. The grass grows fast. People dig roots. 
Seventh Moon, or Peltepa'ntsk (‘midsummer [month’). — People fish 
trout at the lakes. 
Eighth Moon, or Pelka'kaldemex (‘getting-ripe month”). — Service-berries 
ripen. . Ninth Moon, or Peltemeli’k (‘autumn month”). — Salmon arrive. 
Zenth Moon, or Peltselelxten. — People fish salmon all month. 
Eleventh Moon, or Peixetcikenten. — People cache their fish, and leave 
the rivers to hunt. 
Balance of the Vear, Petwélisten (‘fall time”). — People hunt and trap 
game in the mountains. Most of the Shuswap entered their winter houses about a month carlier 
than the Thompson tribe, but both tribes commenced the count of the year 
with the same moon. 
Hunting. — Hunting and snaring of game was a very important 
occupation, and with some bands took precedence over all others. Trapping 
became of great importance after the advent of the fur companies; and some 
parties used to spend all fall, winter, and spring, hunting and trapping on 
distant grounds. On these expeditions they sometimes encountered members 
of the Kootenai, Stony, Beaver, and Sekanai tribes similarly engaged. The 
Carrier band who formerly inhabited Bear Lake, in the Caribou district, 
were sometimes visited, and members of the Iroquois band and the Cree 
were met with. The chief animals trapped were marten, mink, fisher, beaver, 
fox, and lynx. 
Bows and arrows were the principal weapons used in the chase and in 
war. Sinew-backed bows covered with snake-skin were those generally used. 
Other bows were only used occasionally for practice, or by boys. The 
common style of ornamentation on Shuswap bows was as follows. The 
inside of the bow was all stained red. The handgrip was covered with 
sinew or a wrapping of bird-cherry bark. Each side of the handgrip was 
ornamented with a braid of quill work passing around the bow; or the quills 
were put on flat, and not braided. From these protruded two entire tails 
of the redshafted flicker, one on each side. Sometimes, instead of snake- 
skin, the whole back of the bow was covered with dyed quills (Fig. 236). 
Sinew was glued on the back to a thickness of nearly half an inch, in the 
same manner as on the Thompson bows. Yew-wood was used for bows by

----

TEIT. THE SHUSWAP. 519 
some of the Shuswap Lake and North Thompson Indians, and also by a few others who obtained this wood from the Lillooet. The rest of the tribe 
made their bows of juniper-wood. Bow-strings were always of sinew, carefully 
twisted, and at least sometimes stretched with weights. Almost all strings 
were rubbed with glue, which was generally made from salmon or sturgeon 
skins. Bow-points like those of the Carrier and Sekanai were not used. 
Probably the most common shape of bow was the flat bow,! made from two 
and a half to four fingers in width, and 120-150 cm. long. The other 
common style of bow? had an excentric string, and was held vertically. It 
was never over 120 cm. long, and was used by men of all the different 
bands. It is said no hand-guards were used. 
Arrows were of about the same length as those of the Thompson 
Indians, and were made of rosewood and serviceberry wood. They were 
polished with stone arrow-smoothers. Many hunting-arrows had grooves,* 
generally two, running nearly the full length of the shaft, for the purpose 
of allowing the blood to escape more freely, and thus facilitating the tracking 
of wounded game. Other arrows had detachable foreshafts.! Practice-arrows 
had no heads; while birdarrows had a thick blunt point like those of the 
  Fig. 336. Bow. (From a sketch made by an Indian) 
Chilcotin and Sekanai. Rabbitarrows were not much used. They were like 
those of the Chileotin. Feathers were attached to the shafts with a wrapping 
of fine sinew smeared with glue. Instead of glue, gum from buds or tips of 
the balsam-poplar was often used. 
Arrow-heads were almost invariably of stone, and in later days of iron. 
Beaver-teeth, bone, and horn were occasionally used. The stone points were 
of two common types, — leafshaped and notched.* Arrowstone was obtained 
in many parts of the country, notably in the Arrow-stone Range, near 
Bonaparte River. Large roughly chipped arrow-stones were found scattered 
over the surface in many places. These were called “thunder arrow-heads,” 
because supposed to have been fired by the Thunder. They were broken 
up and formed into small arrow-heads. Iron arrow-points were nearly all 
of two types.’ Arrowshafts were painted with several designs, mostly with spirals,   
+See Vol 1 of this series, Figs. 216 and 217, p. 240. + 1bid,, Fig. 218, p. 240. 8 See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Figs. 25 and 26, pp. 55, 56. 4 See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 222, 4, p. 242. + See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénds, Fig. 29, p. 57. © See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 222, a, p. 242. 7 Ibid, Fig. 222, d and 6, p. 243.

----

520 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
which were said to represent lightning or “the shooting” of the thunder-bird. 
A few designs represented snakes. The winged ends of almost all arrows 
were painted red half the length down the feathers, and this became noted as 
a distinguishing feature of Shuswap arrows. Micaceous hematite of a reddish 
tinge was often used for the purpose. The bows and arrows of each Indian tribe could generally be distinguished with certainty by different peculiarities 
of make, ornamentation, feathering, or painting, etc. The Shuswap considered their own bows and arrows and those of the Thompson and Okanagon to be 
neater and more powerful! than those of other tribes. The methods of arrow-release seem to have been primary with the bow 
held horizontally, and tertiary with bow held vertically. 
Quivers were made almost altogether of wolverene and fisher skins, the 
brush being left on for ornament. Dog-skins were used by some poor 
people, and several men of the Kamloops band used buffalo-hide. Quivers 
of woven bark were not used. In later days the Hudson Bay Company 
sold skins of pinto or spotted calves to the Indians, who used them for quivers. 
With the advent of guns, powder-horns came into use, and were made 
by the Indians themselves of buffalo-horn, cow-horn, and occasionally of 
goathorn or of wood. They were ornamented with feathers and strings of 
beads. Shot-pouches also came into use. They were made of buckskin 
richly beaded, or of various kinds of skins with the hair on. Pieces of thick 
leather, wood, or bone, were cut into shape? a number of little protuberances 
being left along the edges, on which the gun-caps were fitted. They were 
tied to the string of the powder-horn or the shot-pouch. 
Dogs of the old Indian breed, the same as those of the Carrier and 
Thompson Indians, were very much used for hunting-purposes. Those of 
the Shuswap were known at times to breed with both the timber wolf and 
the coyote. They were led with halters having toggles. Sometimes hunting- dogs were sweatbathed, and frequently luke-warm drinks prepared from 
“Hudson Bay plant were given to them. The decoction was also run 
through their nostrils to cleanse them. For this reason the plant is called 
“dog-plant’ by the Shuswap. A number of different calls were used for game. Does were called 
with a leaf held between the lips, an imitation of a fawn's cry being made. 
Bullelk and some kinds of birds, such as geese, were called with a long 
bone tube resembling a whistle without holes. Elk and moose were often 
called with the hollow stem of Heraclewm lanatum. Rams of the mountain- 
  
© In 1703 Mackensie and bis party, who were accustomed to bows of Eastern tribes, were astonished at the power of 5 bow which they obtained on Fraser River, a blunt arrow penetrating a hard dry lo to the depth of an inch. His men remarked on the danger of being in the power of a people possessed of such means of destruction (see Voyages from Montreal, etc, p. 257). + See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 72, p. 83. 3 See Vol. L of this series, Fig. 237 p. 245.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 521 
sheep were called by striking on cach other two very dry hollow sounding- 
sticks, which made a noise like rams fighting. Males of various kinds of game were called by making a noise with two sticks in imitation of that 
made by the animals when rubbing their horns against trees. Buck-deer 
and bull-caribou were often called by imitating their cries without the aid of 
any instrument. All these calls were used in thick timber or other places 
where the game was difficult to sce. Calls made of bone and wood were 
carried in the quiver, which was sometimes fitted with a bag for this purpose. 
The fire-drill was carried in the same way. 
All the methods of hunting employed by the Thompson Indians? were 
also in vogue among the Shuswap, but nets for deer were not used. On 
mountains culminating in small, round, open tops, bands of deer and sheep 
were encircled by a numerous band of hunters from below, and were gradually 
driven up to the top, where the surrounding hunters closed in and shot them. 
Deerfences provided with snares were very common. In wooded districts, 
where trails followed by the deer in their fall migration crossed small creeks, 
spears called teelaks were used. 
These had very long sharp stone 
points. These spears were placed 
at the spot where the deer jumped 
across the creek, and were most 
effective at nighttime. One spear 
was placed so that it pierced the 
deer's breast when it jumped; and 
two others were placed one on 
each side, about level with the ribs. 
When the deer jumped aside after 
being pierced by the first spear, one of the others entered its side; and 
when it jumped away from it, the third onc stabbed it. The spears had 
stout handles, the buttends of which were embedded in the ground, and 
they were sometimes further supported by branches. Often deer were so 
badly wounded that they died on the spot. Sometimes they got away, even 
dragging onc or more of the spears with them, but were never able to go 
far before they died through loss of blood. Occasionally caribou were also 
killed in this way. 
The Lake division used corrals very extensively for catching deer. 
These were built at small lakes, where the deer were in the habit of 
swimming during their fall migrations. At the places where deer generally 
took the water, rough fences (Fig. 237) were erected in the form of wings, 
which directed the animals to one point at the water's edge. From this 
  Fig. 237. Coreal for catching Deer, 
  
© See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 244-249.

----

522 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
point a large, somewhat round corral was built out in the water by driving 
stakes so close together that no deer could pass between. The ends of the 
stakes were sometimes fastened together with withes to prevent them from giving way to pressure. A gate was left in the corral just large enough to 
allow the passage of a bark canoe, which was used for catching the deer 
inside. This was generally done by securing the neck or antlers with a 
hooked stick, and drawing the 
head under water until the 
deer was drowned. When the 
canoe retired, the gate was 
blocked with a net, in which 
the deer sometimes became 
entangled. As a rule, however, 
it swam around the corral, and 
was hardly ever able to get out. 
Other corrals (Fig. 238) 
were intended for the capture 
of deer when they left the 
water. Two long wings of stakes were placed along the shores of the lake, and extended out some distance at favorite spots for deer landing. These wings directed the animals to a kind of chute leading into a high corral. Here the deer was killed by a person on watch, who entered from behind, or it was caught in rope noses placed in the openings of the corral. A few small corrals built in the water also had long narrow chutes, into which the deer sometimes swam. Being un- 
able to turn, they were thus caught. 
These were not generally watched 
by a canoe-man, the ends of the 
chutes being blocked with bag- 
like nets, in which the deer often 
became entangled. Sometimes 
men in a canoe on watch clubbed 
them when coming out of the 
ends of the chutes (Fig. 230). 
Bears were caught in spring- 
traps similar to those in which deer were caught! The poles used were 
about six metres long. The noose was attached to the small end of the 
pole, and placed across the opening in the fence in such a manner that the 
bear would push his head through it. 
A noose for lynx was placed in thick brushes, cither between saplings   
  
  Fig. 238. Coral for catching Deer. 
  Fig. 239. Corral for catching Deer. 
  
+ See Vol 1 of tis series, Fig. 228, p. 247.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 523 
or ina frame built for the purpose. The noose was kept open by very 
thin strings, which would tear easily, and the bait was placed so that the 
lynx had to reach it by putting its head through the noose. By its efforts 
the thin strings which kept the noose open were torn, and in its efforts to 
get loose the animal strangled itself. Eagles were caught in baited pits. 
A trench about the length and depth of a man's body was made on some 
exposed ridge where eagles often passed. One man lay down in the trench, 
and his comrade covered body and head with brush and grass. Two 
horizontal branches were rigged up about 75 cm. above and back from his 
face, resting on two pairs of supports driven into the ground on each side 
of the trench. To the crossbranches was tied a small salmon as bait. 
When the eagle alighted on the upper cross-piece, the man seized its legs 
and dragged it in between the two crossbars, where 
it was helpless. If the man could hold both its legs 
with one hand, then he pulled out the tail-feathers 
with the other. If he could not do this, then he held 
it with both hands until his companion came up and 
pulled out the feathers, afterwards letting it go. 
Sometimes they killed the eagle and skinned it. 
Marmots were generally snared, but sometimes 
they were chased. Rabbits and grouse were snared 
as well as chased. Foxes, lynx, coyotes, and wolves 
were snared or trapped. Bears were chased and also 
caught in deadfalls. Goats, although numerous in 
many places, were not much hunted. Moose, caribou, 
elk, deer, and sheep were hunted with bows and 
arrows, and some were also snared. 
Before the introduction of steel traps, beavers 
were hunted with spears having detachable bone points 
fastened with a thong to the shaft. The beaverspear Fig wo Heverspar 
of the Lake division was made of antler or bone G. Hever New Yor) Tout (Fig. 240), and had three or four large barbs. The loath 2s cn. 
butt-end was fitted into a foreshaft of birch or poplar wood, which consisted 
of two halfcylinders lashed together. The point of the shaft was inserted 
in a hollow of the foreshaft made by the ends of the groove in which the 
spearhead was enclosed. Beavers were also caught in widemeshed nets, 
but 1 do not know whether the methods of netting them were the same as 
those of the Carrier or not! One kind of beavernet used was in the style 
of a bagnet, and was set at holes in the ice, to which the beaver swam 
when its house was disturbed. Muskrats were also sometimes caught in a 
similar fashion. 
    
See Morice, Notes on the Western Déns.

----

524 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
I did not succeed in obtaining very minute information regarding the 
primitive methods of snaring and trapping. The deer-snare set in fences, 
and a rabbitsnare? were like those described before. Another rabbit-snare 
was like that of the Carrier! A trap for marten also seems to have been 
identical with one used by the Carrier. A simple noose or snare sometimes 
set for deer and caribou on their trails in timbered parts of the country 
appears to have been the same as that used by the Sekanai® Hunters, 
when in pursuit of game, especially in the wintertime, often wore coats of 
deer-skin with the tail attached, and caps of deer'shead skins with the ears on. 
Caribou and elk, as well as deer, were run with dogs. Dead-falls were 
used chiefly for grisly bears, and were set at places where they came to cat 
salmon. Black bears were often snared with noses set on their trails, as is 
done by the Carrier.! 
Fisuxe. — All the methods of fishing employed by the Thompson 
Indians were also practised by the Shuswap! On Fraser, Chilcotin, and 
Thompson Rivers, salmon were caught in bagmets. On the Upper North 
Thompson, and on some of the small streams, weirs for salmon were used. 
The Fraser River and Cafion bands owned the best salmon-fisheries; but all 
the bands had salmon streams in their country, excepting the Lake division, who did not fish salmon, with the exception of a few individuals who went 
to the North Thompson or Fraser River, and fished with friends. The 
Bonaparte division repaired to Fraser River during the salmon-run, where 
they claimed all the east bank of the river between the High Bar band aid 
the Fountain Lillooet. They did most of their fishing between Pavilion and 
The Fountain. Small parties of Stonies were wont to repair to Columbia 
River, where they fished with the Kinbasket; while on the Upper North 
Thompson a number of Cree came to fish salmon with their Shuswap friends. 
It seems, there was also a small salmonfishery near the head waters of 
Fraser River, which was utilized to a slight extent by Iroquois, Cree, and 
Shuswap. The fish there were very poor. A considerable band of Sekanai 
appeared in that region and took possession of the fishery about four 
generations ago, probably about 1785 or earlier! They held the place for 
several years, apparently meeting little opposition, until driven out by a large 
war-party of Shuswap, who killed a great many of them. Some say the   
  See Val. 1 of this series, Fig. 228, p. 247. © Ibid, Fig. 219, p. 249. See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 95, p. 103. * Ibid, Fig. 80, p. 95. Tod Fig, 80 po tore + Se Morice Nos on the Western Din Fit 86 (99) and Fig. 89 (5. 11) 7 See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 250-254. In 1703 Sic Alexander Mackensie saw near the northern boundary of the Shuswap, on Fraser River, a Sckanai slave woman, then marcied to a Shuswap. She told bim her people bad been tacked by Cree, who had enslaved her, and taken her the greater part of the way fo their couniry, when she effected her escape, and journeyed towards the head of Fraser River, where her people bad a fishery. When she arrived there, she was Captured by + war-party of Shuswap who had just driven ber tribe away from the fsbery. This is no doubt the same afr of which the Shuswap have traditions. Through Mackentie's account the date of the driving-out of the Sekanai can be ascertained almost exactly (sec Voyages from Montreal, etc, pp. 240 and 241). 
   

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 525 
Sekanai were attacked by a party of Cree shortly before this event; but the 
Cree did not follow up their attack nor try to drive out the Sckanai. Since 
they were attacked by the Shuswap, they have never returned. According 
to common tradition, a band of Fraser River Shuswap at one time took 
possession of the part of the Lillooet country between Anderson Lake and 
Pemberton, holding it for several years, chiefly for salmon-fishing! The 
rapids of Chilcotin River at the mouth of the Cafion were probably the most 
important salmon-fishery in the whole Shuswap country. 
The dipnets, fish-spears, and hooks and lines, were like those of the 
Thompson Indians? Single-pronged spears like those of the Kootenai were 
also used. Hooks were made of splinters from all kinds of animal bone. 
On the stiller reaches of the Thompson River and on Kamloops Lake and some 
other lakes, fish, especially large trout, were speared by torchlight from 
canoes and rafts; but on Fraser River the water was too muddy for this 
method of fishing. Eye-shades similar to those of the Thompson Indians 
were used, made of stiff hide or bark. Short lines having ten or more 
baited hooks were set between stakes along the edges of rivers and lakes, 
‘and short nets were set in the same way. Among the Lake division, who 
were celebrated for expertness in fishing, these short lines were joined until 
they formed a ‘long line’ of half a mile or so in extent, and were set in 
the larger lakes. They were provided with sinkers and floats, the latter 
being attached at the junctions of the short lines. At the two ends of the 
“long line’ much larger floats were attached. The small lines, to which the 
hooks were fastened, were of the same thickness as lines used for rod-fishing, 
while the main line from which they hung was much thicker. It seems that 
ordinary floats or buoys — at least, among the Lake division — always 
copsisted of dry willow wands, with a stone lashed to one end, just sufficient in weight to make the wand assume an upright position in the water. The 
larger buoys were of the same kind; only much thicker sticks were used, 
with brush attached to the upper end, so that they could be more easily 
seen. Sinkers consisted of smooth stones of various sizes enclosed in litle 
sacks of netting, provided with strings for handy attachment to nets or lines. 
Trolling-lines, which were dragged behind canoes or gathered up in the hand 
and thrown out from shore, to be drawn in again rapidly, were provided 
with small smooth stones, attached by simply taking two or three halfhitches 
around their .middle with the line. Floats for rod-fishing were made of dry 
reeds, and attached in the same manner as the sinkers on hand-lines. These 
were wound on reels.* Fish lines and hooks were kept in an envelope made 
of bark. A strip of bark was gathered together at one end and tied around.   
1 See pp. 237 <t seq. of this volume. # See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 249 ¢t seq. also Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, p. 73, where Fig. 60 shows a good representation of the Shuswap hook. 3 See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 34, 4, pr 253.

----

526 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Then the other, free end was folded over in the middle. The fishlines were 
kept between these two layers of bark. 
In the springtime, in calm weather, when fish were moving in shoals, 
or at any time when gathered just before the upstream run, very large nets were used by the Lake division. These were upwards of fifty metres in 
length, about seven metres in width across the mouth, and about the same 
in depth, contracting from two sides in the form of a bag (Fig. 241). They 
were dragged on the side. The mouth was attached to thick cords, from 
the lower one of which hung at regular intervals stone sinkers in little net 
bags. Fastened to the corners, and sometimes also to the middle of the upper cord, were draglines for pulling the net through the water. By 
slacking these lines or by increasing the number of sinkers, the net could be 
lowered to intercept fish at various depths. The net was kept stretched by 
men in two canoes, while two other canoes proceeded along the opposite 
side of the shoal, and 
threw stones behind the 
fish to drive them into 
the net. Sometimes four 
canoes dragged the net, 
the men in cach canoe 
paddling in a slightly 
different direction, so as 
Fig. 20n. Net. (From a sketch) to keep the net well stretched. In this manner 
the net was dragged through the shoal. When the net seemed full, light 
ropes attached to the lower rim of the net were hauled in, and thus the mouth was turned up. It was buoyed with paddles and dragged ashore, or 
the contents were scooped out into the canoes with dipnets. Each canoe 
was manned by two men. 
When small fish rose to the surface in shoals, as they will do on warm 
days at certain seasons, men and women in canoes went among them and 
scooped them out into the canoes with bag-nets. Gill-nets of various sizes 
were rigged with buoys and sinkers, and set over night in lakes. Drag-nets 
were also used in lakes near the mouths of creeks, where the bottom was 
not too rough. They were dragged ashore in the form of a halfcircle by 
canoes, which were attached one at each end. 
At suitable places, near points projecting out into lakes, a wing of 
stakes was made in a line converging with the shoreline towards the point, 
where a few stakes extended towards it from the shore (Fig. 242). The 
opening between these converging lines was closed with a very large bag-net, 
having a long handle, and fastened to a log or pole which projected from 
the shore at some height above the opening. On this log, or on a little            
      Ss 
a RISES                   

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 527 
platform erected for the purpose, a man stood, holding the string which kept 
the mouth of the net open. Then a canoe entered the wide part between the wing and the shore, and by throwing stones. 
the fish were scared to the narrow upper end. As 
soon as all the fish had entered the net, the 
man in charge let go the string, allowing the 
net to close, and thus capturing the fish. The 
net was of the ordinary type, attached to horn 
rings which ran on a hoop. This device was 
used for large trout. 
Another method of using nets for trapping 
fish in small swift streams was to place them 
behind openings in weirs (Fig. 243). Some 
ordinary round-mouthed nets without rings were 
used, while the mouths of others were oblong, the upper rim of the mouth 
being held only about 15 cm. above the surface of the water. Nets were 
also sometimes used, fastened to stakes to form corrals behind weirs, funnel- 
shaped baskets leading into them. 
The Shuswap used a great variety of basket fish-traps, especially in the 
smaller streams and near the outlets of lakes. A very common kind had the 
shape of a long cylinder, 
provided inside with a 
conical entrance leading 
from the mouth, and ta- 
pering near the centre of 
the basket to an aperture  — 
just large enough to allow 
a fish to pass through. 7 7 
The smallness of the hole, Umi and the force of the current a1) 
pouring out, stopped the 
fish from getting back. 
Others were of similar construction, but the outer basket tapered towards the end. Still another one consisted simply of long willow wands, which were 
held together by hoops, and which were tied up at the pointed end, so that the fish could be removed by opening the end of the trap. All these 
basket-traps were made of long willow wands or light rods, which run from 
the hoop that forms the entrance towards the opposite end, and which are 
held together by a simple method of weaving. These traps were set in 
weirs in small creeks; but when used in wide, rapid streams, they were set 
at the head of small wing-dams made of stones and stakes (see Fig. 242), 
where they were securely fastened, and sometimes further secured with a 
  Fig. 242. Fish Weir. 
    Fig. 243. Fish Weir,

----

528 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
rope to the shore. They varied considerably in size; and it is said some of 
the large ones, set in still or very sluggish water, had entrances at both 
ends, so that fish could enter from up or down stream. The most common 
  
  
      
Fig. 244, Fish Weir. 
kind of conical baskettrap was about two and a half or three metres long, the tips of the wands being tied together to form the small end. The tips of those forming the inner or entrance basket were not tied, but made to converge so as almost to touch, giving just room for the fish to enter. 
Another kind of 
basket, made long, and 
=> 7 of funnel shape, had no 
conical entrance, but the 
tips of the wands at the 
end of the basket were 
made to converge (Fig. 
244). They were placed 
with the converging end 
leading into a box made 
of rods, or into various 
kinds of corrals made 
of stakes, brush, stones, or netting. 
Another kind of trap 
(Fig. 245, a) consisted 
of a flat box or corral 
made of rods, all along the upstream side of which a row of short twigs 
were so fastened that the slightest pressure on the top of any of them bent 
them down, allowing the fish to enter; and immediately they sprang up again, 
precluding escape. A similar kind (Fig. 245, 4), with the twigs so fastened 
that they were raised by light pressure, was also used. Some of these had 
the twigs placed very flat. Sometimes poles were placed across stream, and twigs adjusted to them 
(in the manner of the last-described traps) the whole width of the stream. 
The fish passing through found themselves in corrals of stakes and brush. 
These traps were generally used in sluggish, shallow streams. 
Another style of trap (Fig. 245, ¢) consisted of a corral with high sides,   
  
  Fig. 245. Fish Trape.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 529 
made in the form of a box; or was round, made of stakes and brush. 
Leading through a weir into the corral were a number of long poles laid 
close together, with ends reaching inside the box and projecting slightly 
above the surface of the water. The fish swam along these, and, dropping 
over the ends, were seldom able to escape. Sometimes poles resting on logs 
were placed across the entire width of the stream.. The water poured over 
their ends, making a fall, and the fish dropped into a corral formed by a 
weir placed across the stream a metre or more below. To prevent the fish 
from jumping back upstream, a fence of brush was run across the stream a 
little back from the ends of the poles, and raised a few inches above the 
surface of the water. 
Another trap,! similar in principle to the above, was made of willow 
wands in the form of two large 
troughs or halfbaskets, much 
deeper in the middle than at the 
sides. The one intended to be 
upstream was made of equal 
width throughout; but the mouth- 
part set in the weir was deep, 
while the opposite end, which 
projected into the mouth of the lower basket, was shallow, the ends slightly 
projecting above the water. The sticks of the lower trough converged at the 
downstream end, where they were tied. When no person was watching the 
trap to remove the fish, the lower trough was covered with brush or bark 
to prevent the fish from jumping out. This was a very common trap among. 
the Shuswap of all parts. 
Still another kind of trap (Fig. 246) was made with rods, or thin slats 
of wood, in the form of a square box, two rows of flexible slats or twigs 
converging towards the middle. If intended to be set in a sluggish stream 
near the outlet of a lake, they were provided with converging slats at the 
opposite end also, so that fish could enter either way. 
All box-shaped traps, if the sides were not very high, were covered 
with poles, brush, or bark, to stop the fish from leaping out. Light traps were removed, and the contents dumped out on shore, but heavier ones were 
generally emptied by scooping out the fish with small dip-nets. The bottoms. of some baskettraps could be removed, while others were simply untied. 
All these traps were generally designed for the capture of trout and other 
small fish. Large fish were caught with some, however, particularly those 
shown in Fig. 245. 
Regular weirs were erected to intercept large or small fish when running,     Fig. 246. Fish-Trsp. 
  
VSee George M. Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia (Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, Section 11, 1891, Fig. 3, p. 17).

----

530 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 
generally when going upstream. They were constructed in the same way 
as those of the Thompson Indians! The fish, stopped in their progress, congregated in numbers at the weir, and were scooped out with dip-nets, lifted out with spears, or hooked out with gaffs. The last-named consisted 
of a bone hook fastened to a wooden handle or shank in the manner of 
some fish-hooks. They were not much used before the advent of iron. 
Sometimes narrow scaffolds or platforms were made across the weirs at some 
little height above the water, for the 
convenience of people crossing, spearing, bag-netting, etc. People catching fish 
from the middle of the weir put them 
into net bags suspended there for the 
purpose. Those catching them from 
the shore threw them into round stone 
or brush corrals made for the purpose. 
To facilitate bag-netting, when fish 
were not plentiful, deep, semicircular 
basins of stones were made below the ends of the weir (Fig. 247). Fish coming up found progress barred at the 
weir, which they followed along to the end, and, entering the basin, were 
scooped out. Platforms like those used on the large rivers were erected 
above the basins. 
Weirs were also made double, forming a corral to hold the fish? 
Openings were left in one, generally the lower one, which were guarded 
with devices like those shown in Figs. 245, and 4, or provided with funnel- 
shaped baskets. 
On lakes and some rivers, fishing with bait was carried on in the winter- time through holes in the ice. Sometimes bone imitations of fry were used.® and moved up and down in the water by means of a string fastened to a small cross-piece of bone or wood held in one hand. Sometimes the string 
passed through a small hole in the handle. Upon the fish biting the decoy, 
it was at once speared with a three-pronged spear held in the other hand. 
Iee-breakers were used which consisted of long chisel-pointed pieces of 
antler; and scoops, for lifting loose ice out of the hole, seem to have been 
the same as those used by the Carrier,' but probably several different forms 
were in use. Most of the above-described fishing-devices are still more or 
less in use. 
  Fig. 247. Fish-Weir. 
  
1 See Vol. 1 of this series, p. 254. £ Sco Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia, Fig. 7, p. 16. # See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénds, Fig. 5, p. 72. « Tbid,, Fig. 146, p. 155.

----

VI. — TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION; TRADE. 
Trav Ap TRANSPORTATION. — Canoes were used more extensively 
than among the Thompson tribe, as opportunities for their use were much 
more frequent. The Shuswap had a much greater extent of easily navigated 
water-ways in their country, and there were many large lakes. Nearly all 
the Shuswap canoes were of bark. Only a very few wooden canoes were 
used, and these mostly on Fraser River; but even there most canoes were 
made of bark. 
Dug-outs were made of cottonwood logs in a rather rough manner, and 
were similar in shape to the river-canoes’ used by the tribes lower down 
Fraser River. Almost all the canoes of the bands of the Lake division 
were made of bark; but after the introduction of iron tools, dug-outs were 
more frequently made, and at the present day are in universal use. A very 
few bark canoes with bow and stern curving upwards, similar to those of 
the Carrier, were made; but the great majority of bark canoes all over the country were made of the ‘sturgeon-nose’ type, so called by the employees 
of the fur companies because of their pointed ends at the waterline. 
Mackenzie in 1793, and Fraser in 1808, both mention seeing these canoes on the Fraser River. This was also the common style of bark canoe among 
the Upper Thompson Indians, Okanagon, and Kootenai. They were also used 
by the Upper Lillooet. Those of the Shuswap, however, were turned up 
more at the ends than the canoes of other tribes. They were made of 
spruce-bark or white-pine bark turned inside out, and taken off a large tree 
in one piece. The finer sewing was done with split root of spruce or pine; 
but most of the sewing and fastening were done with split-willow wands and 
tops of hemp (Apocynum) bushes. Inside were placed, a few inches apart, 
pliable slats or rods, — one set running longitudinally, and another set 
transversely. The bottom was covered with loose strips of bark of the birch, 
cedar, and spruce, or with brush or long light poles. The flooring was 
covered with firtwigs or dried swampgrass, which were used as seats. 
Three or more cross-bars, like “canoe-seats” or thwarts, between the gunwales, 
kept the canoe stiff and well stretched. The gunwales were strengthened 
with slats sewed on the full length of the canoe, both outside and inside, — 
  
+ See Vol. I of this series, Fig. 237, p. 255. # See Otis T. Mason, Pointed Bark Canoes of the Kutenai and the Amur (Report of the United Sites National Museum, 1899, pp. 223 et seq). 
[s31)

----

532 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
as in some birch-bark baskets, — and each end was provided with two slats 
in the same way. The ends were caulked with moss and pitch. Knotholes 
were caulked by slitting their edges and inserting thin shavings of wood to 
fit the hole. The whole was then covered with a liberal coat of gum. 
When a bark canoe sprang a small leak, it was mended in the same way 
as the knotholes were filled. Large leaks were patched with strong pieces 
of bark, which were cut larger than the hole and sewed on, generally with 
catstitching. The edges of the patch were caulked. The wood used 
was preferably that of a high bush called yuaté'tlp, which grows in some parts 
of the mountains, and is said to resemble alder. These canoes were very 
light, and when loaded were very steady. 
Occasionally very small canoes were made of birch-bark; but large birch- trees were scarce in the Shuswap country, while 
large spruce and pine were plentiful, and considered 
quite as good. Canoes had no ornamentation, and were not 
painted, excepting the wooden ones, which were 
sometimes blackened on the outside with pitch 
smoke. Common types of paddles are shown in Fig. 
248. Of these, a is called by the Thompson 
Indians “the Shuswap paddle.” They were hollowed 
out a little at the end of the handle to provide 
a better grip for the fingers. Paddles were seldom 
painted. Bailers for canoes were in the forms of 
dishes and small baskets. They were roughly 
sewed of various kinds of bark. 
The Shuswap make very few canoes nowadays. 
Some dug-outs are used on the rivers, and a few bark canoes may still be 
seen on certain lakes and in the eastern part of the country. Canoes made 
of tule or rushes were not used, so far as I can learn, but rafts of tule were 
occasionally used. 
Prior to the introduction of horses, goods were transported in canoes on 
rivers and lakes; but where no easy waterways existed, everything was 
transported on the backs of men, women, children, and dogs. Woven 
carrying-bags of babiche, and large bags of caribou-leg skins (see Fig. 221, p. 499), 
were used for transporting baggage, provisions, etc. They were attached 
to wide tump-lines of stout buckskin passed over the head of the person 
carrying them. 
Several methods of carrying game to camp were practised. Large fish 
were rolled up in firbrush or a piece of bark, and tied with the ends of the 
tump-line. Small fish were carried in rush bags, or strung on willow switches a & < 
Fig. 248. Types of Paddles.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 533 
having a crotched or hooked end. Grouse and other birds. rabbits, and 
squirrels were carried in netted game-bags, or tied on a cord with a hitch 
around one wing and the head of cach. 
Meat of deer and other large game was transported in several ways. 
In the wintertime, with suitable snow on the ground, and where the country 
was not too brushy, it was put inside the skin and sewed up lengthwise 
with a detached end of the tumpline passed through slits made near the 
edges of the skin. The rest of the tump-line was attached to the head-part 
of the skin, and the whole dragged over the snow like a toboggan or sled. 
If a horse were at hand, the line was attached to the saddle. 
If the meat had to" be carried, the several pieces were attached firmly 
together by passing thongs through slits in the flesh, or by pushing 
wooden skewers through all the pieces. Pieces of fir-branches were stuck in 
all over the side of the pack intended to be next the person's back. 
Sometimes the pack was made up by lashing the pieces of meat between two snowshoes which were carried tail down. 
A very common method was to make the skin of the deer serve as a 
bag for carrying the meat in. The meat was placed in the middle of the 
skiny and a rod sharpened at both ends, and narrower than the skin, was placed across at the shoulders. The skin of the forelegs was folded in, and 
then the neck-skin turned down over them. The hind-legs were joined near 
the feet by means of a short pin passing through three or four slits in the 
skin. The part of the skin having the long rod inside was then passed 
through the loop formed by the hind-legs, the latter being used on the head 
as a tumpline. All these methods of carrying game are also used by the 
Thompson Indians. 
As far as I can learn, dogs were never used for hauling sleds as among 
the neighboring Athapascan tribes. Horses seem to have been introduced 
about 1780 or earlier, and appear to have been fairly plentiful among the 
more southern bands in 1808, when Simon Fraser descended Fraser River. 
He mentions seeing horses and their signs several times. The Shuswap 
obtained them from the Okanagon and Thompson, both of which tribes seem 
to have had numbers of horses in 1808." The Shuswap say that horses 
were not plentiful until about 1840, when several families had considerable 
bands. In severe winters, about 1847 or 1849, a great many of the horses 
died. About this time the use of horses for food was given up, and they 
soon multiplied and becawe quite plentiful early in the fifties. With the 
advent of these animals, travelling became easier. Pack-saddles made of 
cottonwood came into use, and burdens were carried on the sides of horses 
in panniers made like the carrying-bags, and provided with loops to go over 
  
1 See Simon Fraser, Journal of a Voyage from the Rocky Mountains to the Paci Coss, 1808, p. 175.

----

534 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the horns of the saddle, the whole being lashed on with a long rope made 
of rawhide or horsehair. Goat-skins, the skins of deer killed in the spring, 
and mats woven of rushes, were used as saddle-blankets  cinches were woven of horsehair; cruppers were made of buckskin padded with deer-hair; while 
rings, hooks, and other required attachments were made of wood and antler. 
Before long the Shuswap copied after the Thompson Indians and the Okanagon, 
and used parfléches of caribou, deer, and horse:skin with the hair on. In 
recent days cow-skins are more commonly used. None of these had any 
painting or ornamentation. Riding-saddles with horns of antler, and others without horns, padded 
with deer-hair, came into use. They had stirrups of wood or of shecp's- 
horn, and beaded cruppers, and collars were often attached to them. Halters, 
bridles, and hobbles were made of horsehair; ‘stake’ ropes and “las” ropes, 
of horsehair and rawhide. 
  Fig. 249 (gifs): Snowshoe. Length, 120 cm. 
Snowshoes were much used when travelling in the wintertime. The 
Shuswap made much longer, finer snowshoes than the Thompson Indians. By far the most common snowshoe among all the divisions of the tribe was 
made with two ‘groundsticks’ joined together at the heel and toe, the toe- 
part being turncd up considerably, and the shoe provided with two cross- 
sticks (Fig. 249). This kind of showshoe was of two shapes. One sort had 
the back cross-stick almost or quite as wide as the front one, while the other 
variety had the front stick very much wider than the back one. Besides 
these, a very few snowshoes of what was called the “bear-foot” type were 
used by women and children in some parts of the country. These were 
made somewhat round, the “groundstick” consisting of a single piece joined 
at the “ail” They had one crossstick, and the netting was of coarse 
material with wide mesh! Almost as rare as the latter were those made 
like the snowshoes of the Thompson tribe? They, too, were used only by 
women and children. The frames or ground-sticks of snowshoes were made 
of mountain maple-wood or of sapling fir. Crosssticks were generally of   
+ See Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada. (Report of British Association for the Advances ment of Science, for 1899, p. 636); also Morice, Notes on the Wester Déns, Fig. 143, p- 154. + See Vol. T of this series, Figs. 239-242, pp. 256 and 257.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 535 
birch-wood. The finer filling in snowshoes was made of caribou or deer 
skin; and the coarser netting, of skin from the neck-part of buck, horse, or 
elk. Recently cow-skin has been chiefly used. Some men decorated their 
snowshoes with small tassels of dyed hair. 
Walking sticks having a circular frame filled with netting, like those of 
the Carrier, were used in deep snow.! For use on slippery hillsides, cross- 
pieces of skin were sewed on the soles of moccasins, as among the 
Thompson tribe.* 
Trape. — Considerable trading was done by some Shuswap bands. 
The Cafion division were the greatest traders, and acted as middlemen 
between the other Shuswap bands and the Chilcotin, whom they would not 
allow to trade directly with one another. They bought the products of both, 
and exchanged them at a profit. They controlled part of the Chilcotin 
salmon-supply, and the Chilcotin traded extensively with them. Because of 
their frequent trading and profitmaking, the Cafon Indians were a wealthy 
people, and gave frequent potlatches. They gave all their energies to 
salmon-fishing, the preparation of oil, and trading, and did very little 
travelling or hunting. They were almost completely sedentary, most of them 
living summer and winter in the same locality. Some families lived within 
a radius of half a mile for years. From the Chilcotin they received large 
quantities of dentalium-shells, some woven goat'shair blankets and belts, 
bales of dressed marmotskins, a few rabbitskin robes, a few snowshoes of 
the best type, and in fact anything of value they had to give. In exchange 
they gave chiefly dried salmon and salmon-oil, some woven baskets of the 
best type, paint, and in later days horses. Indian hemp was hardly ever 
sold to the Chilcotin, because it was scarce; and horses were not sold until 
they had become plentiful among the Shuswap. 
Very little trading was done with the Carrier; but the Soda Creek 
band sold them deer-skins, some dried salmon and salmon-oil, receiving 
moose-skins and a few other things in exchange. In 1806, after the Northwest 
Company established ~trading-posts in the Carrier country, the northern 
Shuswap sold furs to the Carrier, and in return received white men's 
articles. Upon the establishment of a post at Alexandria in 1821} the 
northern Shuswap repaired there, and sold their furs directly to the whites. 
The tribe had no trade-relations with the Sekanai and Beaver, but the North 
Thompson people exchanged with the Cree dried salmon, salmon-oil, and 
dentalium-shells for moosc.skins and Cree-made clothes! They also sold to 
the Cree some marmot robes and other robes. Afier the establishment of a 
trading-post at Kamloops, they sometimes bought furs and moose-skins from   
1 Sce Morice, Notes on the Western Inds, Fig. 14, p. 154 2 See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 171, p. 215. 3 See Morice, History of Northern British Columbis, p. 119. « Simon Fraser (in 1808) mentions secing a silver brooch, “such 2s the Saulteaux wear,” and “clothing such as the Cree women wear,” among the Thompson, near Lytton (see his Journal, pp. 178 and 181).

----

536 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the Iroquois band, which they sold with their own furs when they repaired 
to the post. With the Stonies and Kootenai very little trading was done; 
but dentalium-shells were occasionally sold to them, and clothes, buffalo-skins, 
and other common things, received in return. Trade with the Kootenai 
seems to have been principally between the Flatbow band of Kootenai Lake, 
and the Shuswap frequenting the Arrow Lakes. 
The Kamloops and Shuswap Lake divisions received from the Okanagon 
roots of certain kinds, Indian-hemp bark, horses, occasionally saddles, buffalo- 
robes, bags of woven bark thread, painted hide bags, parfléches, and wampum 
beads, giving in exchange dentalium-shells, a little copper, marmot-skin robes, and occasionally snowshoes. In later days they received glass beads and 
iron. From the Thompson the Bonaparte and Kamloops divisions received roots of certain kinds, dried salmon, salmonoil, Indianhemp bark and thread, 
horses, woven bags and baskets, parfliches, and wampum beads, for which 
they gave dentalium-shells, marmot and rabbit skin robes, occasionally snow- 
shoes, dressed moose and caribou skins, and a little paint. 
The Bonaparte and Lower Fraser River bands obtained from the Lillooet, 
salmon, oil, woven baskets, goathair robes, skins of small Columbian deer, 
and a little wa'asélp (Phisladelphus Lewisii Pursh) and yew-wood, giving 
in exchange dentalium-shells, skin robes, dressed buckskin, a little paint, and 
in later days horses. Frequently some of the Kamloops people went over to 
The Fountain and traded with the Lillooet directly. This was a great trading- 
place in carly days. There were no restrictions, members from any part of 
the tribe trading where they liked, except at the Chilcotin Cafion. 
Articles from the Pacific coast reached the Shuswap by two routes, via 
Chilcotin and Lillooet. Slaves were sometimes exchanged at The Fountain, 
and numerous slaves taken in war from the Lillooet were sold back to their 
friends at this place for good prices. Even the Thompson Indians sometimes 
brought slaves here to sell back to their Lillooet friends. Sometimes members 
of the Fraser River division went direct to the Upper Thompson tribe, and 
traded for salmon in the neighborhood of Spences Bridge. Occasionally some 
Carrier Indians accompanied them. After the establishment of a trading-post 
at Kamloops, the band there sold many articles of European manufacture to 
the other Shuswap bands and to the Thompson tribe, receiving furs in return; but this did not last long, as the various bands found it more 
advantageous to deal directly with the post, and the Thompson Indians commenced to repair there also. 
Exchange also took place at Green Lake, where great numbers from 
all divisions of the tribe congregated once a year to have sports and to trap 
trout, etc. This gathering-place was to the Shuswap what Botani® was to the 
    
+ See Vol. I of this seri, p. 204.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 537 
Thompson tribe. Here the Lake Division sold some dried trout, nets, carrying-bags, some cedar-root, very dark marmotskins, and a few baskets, 
principally to the Fraser River bands, for dried salmon, salmon oil, and 
shells. The North Thompson band brought hazel-nuts to sell. 
In carly days the Indians sold to the Hudson Bay Company large 
quantities of furs of all kinds, dressed skins, moccasins, dried roots and 
berries, dried meat, fat, dried salmon, dogs and horses, receiving in exchange 
principally woollen blankets, cloth, glass beads, steel traps, flintlock muskets, 
powder, ball and shot, axes, tomahawks, steels and fiints, knives, tobacco, 
iron, copper kettles, brass finger-rings, bracelets, etc. 
1 may here mention feathers, which were often an article of trade. 
Quills, principally those of the goose and swan, were fairly plentiful, and 
therefore cheap; and the same may be said of the tailfeathers of the red- 
shafted flicker and of the hawks, which were also much used for decorative 
purposes; but tail-feathers of the golden eagle, and woodpecker-scalps. owing 
to the demand for them and their comparative scarcity, were of considerable 
value. Four tailfeathers of the adult golden eagle were equal in value to 
one large dressed beaverskin. After the advent of the Hudson Bay Company, feathers were not so much used, and therefore decreased in value; while 
beaversskins were in demand, and rose greatly in price. An entire scalp of 
the red-headed woodpecker is said at one time to have been equal in value to 
one whole tail of the golden eagle, which meant that it was worth several, probably three, beaver-skins.

----

VII. — WARFARE. 
WeAPoxs OF OFFENCE AND DEFENCE. — Probably all the kinds of weapons 
used by the Thompson Indians were also found among the Shuswap. Bows 
and arrows have been described. Spears, knives, and clubs were like those of 
the Thompson tribe. Clubs with wooden handle, and round grooved stonez 
head attached to the handle by a rawhide thong which passed over the groove, 
were in use. Clubs like Fig. 251, p. 265, were made of stone, wood, and 
antler. Often a suitable elk-antler was split in two, and the half made into 
a club, the edges of which were worked sharp enough to cut. Some clubs 
of wood had spikes consisting of prongs of antler, or of stone and iron 
spear-heads, sunk into the clubhead. Tomahawks were also in use Some 
were double-cnded, having a stout stone or iron knife placed across the head. 
Cuirasses made of slats were rare; but those of rods were common, and 
made of rosewood. Sleeveless tunics of double and treble elk-skins were 
worn. Shields were much used. Simon Fraser? describes a shield which he 
saw near Lillooet. He says. “At this place | saw a shield different from 
any 1 had hitherto seen. It was large enough to cover the whole body, 
composed of splinters of wood like the ribs of stays, and neatly enclosed 
with twine made of hemp.” Probably the most common kind were of medium 
size, made of wooden slats or rosewood rods, woven together with bark 
thread or thong. They were covered with the skin of bear or other animals, 
with the hair on, and sometimes with dressed elk-skin dyed red. Shields 
were hardly ever painted, but were frequently decorated with feathers and 
tufts of slaves’ hair. Wooden shields were usually oval in shape, but some 
were oblong. Rather small circular shields were also used, made of two or 
three thicknesses of stiff elk-hide glued together, and sewed around the 
edges. On the outside two or three coats of glue and sand were sometimes 
applied, and then a coat of red ochre. Long shields of double elk-hide were 
fastened with a thong around the neck. Sometimes they were glued and rubbed with sand to make them stiffer and arrow-proof. 
This is undoubtedly the kind of shield noticed by Sir Alexander 
ie in 1793 among the Carrier of Fraser River, close to the Shuswap 
He says, “They appeared in their garments, which were fastened 
  3 
  
1 See Vol 1 of this series, Figs. 245-248, 250, and 251, pp. 263-365. 2 Ibid, Fig. 347, p. 415. 3 Ibid. Figs. 252 and 299, pp. 265 and 379. ¢ Ibid, Figs. 253 and 254, p. 266. + See'his Journal, p. 179. © See Vol. T of this series, Fig. 255, p. 266. * Alexander Mackeasie, Voyages from Montreal, ete, p. 339. 
[538]

----

TEXT, THE SHUSWAP. 539 
round the neck, but left the right arm free for action. A cord fastened a 
blanket or leather covering under the right armpit, so it hung upon the left 
shoulder, and might be occasionally employed as a target that would turn an 
arrow which was nearly spent.” 
As far as I can ascertain, the Shuswap — at least, the northern ones 
and the Fraser River bands — did not poison their arrows, perhaps because 
the flower used as a poison, and the rattlesnake, were rarely found in the 
Shuswap territory. Two methods were in use, however, which were supposed 
to make their arrows more deadly. Arrows were placed in a bag for four 
nights with wood taken from trees which had been struck and killed by 
lightning. The “mystery” of the lightning was supposed to infect the arrow, 
and make it deadly like itself. Another method less in vogue was to rub 
rotten flesh on arrows. This was supposed to infect them with death and 
render them more deadly. Evidently this was rather a charm than an actual 
process of poisoning the arrow, since it was considered sufficient to place the 
arrow near a dead body. The war-arrows considered most effective had the 
shaft made out of “lightning” wood, the head chipped from a piece of ‘thunder 
arrowhead,” and the feathers taken from the tail of the red-shafted flicker, 
chicken-hawks’ feathers being considered next best. 
Fortresses were used in time of war by those bands who thought 
themselves subject to attack. They were made of various sizes, of logs closely laid together, one above another, with ends squared, in the manner 
of log-cabins. Any spaces between the logs were filled up with stout poles 
placed on the inside. The walls were raised to a height of from two to three 
metres, and loop-holes were left all around at the height of a man shooting with bow or gun. These holes were cut slanting to the right and lefi. In 
later days very heavy logs were used for the walls, so that bullets could 
not pierce them. A deep trench was dug all around the base of the building, 
the earth from which was used for banking up the walls to a height of 
about a metre or over. Inside, pits or underground rooms were dug for 
children and non-combatants during attack. These were roofed with poles, 
and were situated at about the centre of the building. Along the walls 
inside, shades or screens, consisting of mats resting on poles, gave shelter 
to the inmates, for these buildings had no roofs. A supply of food, water, 
and firewood, was kept on hand inside. The entrance consisted of a hole 
in the bottom of one of the walls, just large enough to let a person crawl 
in. This was blocked with a heavy piece of log. A very few had low 
zigzag entrances, which were blocked at night in each turning, and loop-holes 
in the main building covered the approach to the door. A very few also had , 
underground passages leading out to some hidden place, such as behind a 
bowlder or a large tree, by which people could escape if necessary, or send 
a youth to spread the alarm and get aid from neighboring bands. Sometimes

----

540 : TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
men crawled out through these passages, and, gathering under the shelter 
of a bowlder, attacked the besiegers from behind, surprising and routing 
them. These fortresses were square or oblong in shape, — at least, all of 
those used in later days, — and the walls were straight. The people living 
within a certain radius of them retired to them at night. Simon Fraser 
mentions seeing several fortifications along Fraser River in 1808. There 
were two fortifications among the North Thompson band about 1850. 
Firearms did not become general in all parts of the tribe until about 
1840 or later, but as early as 1815 muskets were used in war. War-clubs 
of American or European manufacture sold by the fur companies also came 
into use, but never entirely supplanted the clubs of their own manufacture. 
The common varicties obtained were pipe-tomahawks, spike-ball clubs, and 
machetes. 
Accounts or War Exeeprrions. — The Shuswap were formerly noted as 
a warlike people; but this only held true of the Fraser River, Bonaparte, 
and Kamloops divisions. The others seldom engaged in war, and acted 
only on the defensive 
The Shuswap carried on wars until about 1860 or 1862. The Bonaparte division did not fight with the Thompson or with the Upper Lillooet Indians, 
but frequently attacked the Lillooet of the Lakes and of Lillooet River. 
Some of their warriors ofien joined the Kamloops division on war-expeditions 
against the Okanagon. The Kamloops division made war with the Okanagon, chiefly with the Similkameen people. They also attacked sometimes the 
people of Okanagon River and Okanagon Lake, and the Nicola, Lytton, and 
Upper Fraser bands of the Thompson tribe. They also fought with the 
Upper and Lower Lillooet; and their warriors helped the Fraser River bands 
in wars with the Cree, and assisted the North Thompson people against the 
Sekanai. The Fraser River bands, especially those from Dog Creek to High 
Bar, warred much with the Upper and Lower Lillooet. 
At a time preceding the great war between the Thompson and Lillooet 
Indians, the Fraser River Shuswap carried on an extensive war with the 
latter tribe, and held possession of the central part of the Lillooet country 
for a number of years. This probably happened about the middle of the 
eighteenth century! At this time also they sent one or two expeditions 
against the Coast Indians. Another war sprang up between seventy-five and 
eighty-five years ago, when a war-party of Lillooet massacred a large number 
of the Empire Valley band who were wintering at the Red Butte, near the 
present Empire Valley wagonroad. The Fraser River bands took revenge 
by sending large war-parties in three or four consecutive years, who harried 
the Lillooet country and inflicted great slaughter. From some accounts, it 
  
i See p. 237 of this volume.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 541 
seems that the Fraser River bands were almost constantly hostile to some 
bands of the Lillooet, and raided them at short intervals from times long 
past until 1855 or 1856. 
A very long time ago, long before the appearance of the first whites, 
the northern Fraser River bands carried on two short but sharp wars with 
the Lower Carrier. Eventually peace was made; and since then the Carrier 
have always been friends of the Shuswap, who have often helped them fight 
the Chilcotin. Although the Fraser River bands did not engage in any wars 
with the Chilcotin, nevertheless a continual suspicion and bad feeling existed 
between these tribes, and on Upper Bridge River their hunting-partics often 
attacked each other. At a place called Xwalxa'stken in this region, looked 
upon as a boundary-point between the grounds of the Lillooet, Chilcotin, 
and Shuswap, members of these tribes murdered one another every time they 
had a chance. The Chileotin were formerly very nomadic, and most of the 
year were scattered in small bands over a large extent of country. For this 
reason they were difficult to find or to punish, and war-parties secking them 
had much more difficulty than those attacking the Lillooet or other more 
sedentary tribes. However, the Fraser River bands claim that they avenged 
all murders perpetrated on them by the Chilcotin, and that the last fight 
was in 1861 or 1862, when they killed, in revenge for murders, and in 
spite of the Caflon Indians, some Chilcotin who had come to the Cafon to 
trade. Some say that at a much later date they killed two Chilcotin near 
the same place. It seems that had it not been for the Cafon Indians, who 
acted as peacemakers, there would have been an almost constant state of 
warfare between the Fraser River bands and the Chilcotin. 
The Fraser River bands also carried on wars with the Cree and the 
Thompson Indians of Lytton and of the Upper Fraser River; and on one 
occasion, at least, they combined with the North Thompson people in a war 
against the Sekanai. The Cafion division did not engage in any wars, but 
some of them helped the Fraser River bands against the Cree and Thompson 
Indians, who were dangerous because they invaded the adjacent country. This 
division acted as peacemakers between the Chilcotin and Fraser River bands, 
because peace between them was requisite for their valuable trading-interests. 
On the whole, however, they seem to have favored the Fraser River people, 
war-parties of whom, on payment of certain fees, were sometimes allowed to 
cross their bridge over the Chilcotin River in order to attack the Chilcotin; 
but this privilege was not granted to war-parties of the latter tribe on any 
consideration. 1f a Chilcotin party appeared, bent on revenge, Cuxalé'llp, 
the chief of the southside village at the caiion, would meet them at the 
north end of the bridge, and talk them out of their project; or, failing in this, he would offer them presents or blood-money for their slain relatives. 
Upon their acceptance of these, Kwd'mesken, the chief of the northside

----

542 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
village, feasted them, and thereafter they would return. Two young men 
were told off as scouts every night to watch the bridge, this duty being 
taken by the young men of the place. About 1858 or thereabouts a small 
war-party of Chilcotin crossed the bridge without consent; and this made 
the Cafion chiefs so angry that they destroyed it, saying that the Chilcotin 
should never again have a chance to cross at this place. It seems, however, 
that another, smaller bridge was erected in its place, which was destroyed 
after the practical extermination of the Cafion people by small-pox in 1862. 
It appears that the Lake division and the Shuswap Lake division did 
not engage in any wars, although the Fraser River bands and the Thompson 
Indians sometimes murdered and plundered the former. In fact, many of the 
Lake people would let Fraser River Shuswap turn them out of their lodges 
and steal their property, without offering resistance. 
The North Thompson carried on one war with the Sekanai (probably 
about 1780-90), and another war about seventy-five years ago against the 
Fraser River Shuswap, in which they were sometimes assisted by Cree. 
This is the only war on record which ever took place among the Shuswap 
themselves, although blood feuds — as among the Thompson tribe — 
were common enough in some bands. 
It seems, there were no wars with the Beaver Indians, Iroquois, Stonies, 
and Kootenai. The Stonies are said to have been allies of the Kinbasket, and the Kootenai were always friendly. The only tribes known of, who ever 
raided the Shuswap, were the Thompson, who several times appeared in 
various parts of the country, but who never attacked the Bonaparte division, 
and rarely the Kamloops division; the Okanagon, of Okanagon River and 
south, who occasionally attacked the Shuswap Lake and North Thompson 
people; the Lillooet, who twice attacked Fraser River bands; the Sekanai, who atacked the North Thompson people, and tried to take possession of 
some of their hunting and fishing grounds and the Cree, who were friends 
with the North Thompson people, but who attacked the Fraser River and 
Lake divisions a number of times, chiefly in the latter part of the eighteenth 
century. They also helped the North Thompson people against the Fraser 
River bands, probably about 1835. The Shuswap never made war with the 
whites, but murdered some of them along Fraser River in 1850-64. War-parties consisted of from two or three to one hundred or even two 
hundred men. Commonly, however, they numbered from about twenty to 
seventy braves. They had war chiefs and scouts, as among the Thompson 
Indians; and every large or important party had a shaman, who was 
considered equally as important as the chief. The latter was simply a leader, 
elected for his experience or bravery, and was versed only in the science of 
war, and unable to cope with the enemy except in a material way; while 
the shaman could cope with the enemy in a spiritual way through his

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 543 
shamanistic powers. It was his duty to control the elements, so as to help 
his party and inconvenience the enemy; to prophesy results: to propound 
methods of overcoming the enemy; to ward off spells or evil influences cast 
upon them by the enemy's shamans; and to throw spells on the enemy, so that they might become harmless or fall an easy prey. The war chief or 
the shaman, generally the latter, distributed food, prayed over it, and prayed 
for the party's success. The warriors were formed in a circle, and food was 
passed around in the direction opposite to the sun's course. The party 
fasted more or less rigidly, sweatbathed, and prayed for about four days 
before starting. Then the war.dance was performed, the warriors moving in 
a circle against the sun's course, and singing, as among the Thompson tribe. 
Each man painted himself, and put up his hair in a knot at the back of the 
head. Some had all the hair thus tied in one knot; while others did the 
front hair up in another knot on the top of the head or over the brow. 
Some made their front hair into “horns.” plastered with mud to make them 
stiff, and painted them red or blue. The warriors tried to make themselves look as fierce as possible, and for this purpose many kinds of curious head- 
dresses were worn. Every warrior decorated himself with cagle-feathers stuck 
in or fastened to the hair, or attached to the war-caps which many wore. 
Eagle-feathers were also attached to the elbows, wrists, legs, clothes, spears, 
clubs, and even sometimes to the trailers of moccasins. The Shuswap seldom 
or never beheaded enemies, and very rarely took scalps. The hair of slaves 
taken in war was cut off short, and used as fringes for decorating clothes. 
The war chief generally divided the booty and the slaves. There were 
many noted war chiefs in the tribe. All the members of a war-party 
generally painted in the same way. One Fraser River band painted red and 
white in alternate vertical stripes, and another red and blue. 
As an example of a record of a war-expedition, the following account 
of a war against the Chileotin, which probably took place between 1860 and 
1868, may be given: — 
Some years after the white miners came to the country, a Shuswap 
called Tahu'tthutxen and his two younger brothers went hunting within the 
Shuswap hunting-grounds west of Fraser River. They saw some signs of a 
Chilcotin hunting-party in the neighborhood; and one day, happening to 
separate in their hunt, the youngest brother was murdered by the Chilcotin. Upon their return home, the surviving brothers wished to organize a war- 
party against the Chilcotin; but as white men’s laws were at that time 
beginning to establish themselves, and as tribal warfare had practically ceased, 
they found it very hard to get many men to join them. The other Indians 
pointed out to them that it would require a strong party to be sure of 
punishing the Chilcotin; and the Shuswap who had war experience were now 
few in number, and most of them too old to take the war-path. Tahw'tthutsen,

----

544 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
who was a tall, powerful young man, was not disposed to let his brother's 
death go unavenged; and after trying several times to organize a strong 
party, at last, in the spring of the third year, he made up his mind, if 
needs be, to go alone. The snow had only half disappeared from the mountains when he and his brother and their nearest relative, called Ka'kxa 
(litle dog”), started out, expecting to find the Chilcotin still in their winter 
quarters. They did not know which band of Chilcotin had murdered their 
friend, nor would they have known exactly where to find them if they had 
known; for most of the Chilcotin were nomadic, and often spent successive 
winters in widely different localities. They knew, however, certain places 
where people frequently wintered; and they intended to search in these 
localities, and to kill the first Chilcotin they could find. Ka'kxa, who had 
joined the brothers, was an elderly man, of short stature, and a warrior of 
repute, having in his younger days been on war-expeditions against the 
Lillooet, Thompson, and Chilcotin Indians. Each man was armed with a 
gun, a large warknife, and besides carried bow and arrows. At that time 
most of the Shuswap had ceased using bows and arrows, but a few men 
still remained who were expert in their use. The Chileotin still used them 
extensively. After travelling three days, they came to some winter houses 
of the Chilcotin, near the Chilcotin River, but found that they had been 
deserted for nearly a month. They camped there for the night, and Ka'kxa 
and Tahu'tihutsen’s brother each dreamed, — the former that they would 
not have success, and the other that they would. The next morning they 
were divided in opinion as to whether they should proceed or turn back; 
but Tahu'thutsen was bent on revenge, and at last they determined to go 
on. Large patches of the winter snow still remained; and the Shuswap 
followed the trail of the party, which seemed to number thirty-five or forty 
souls. On the morning of the second day they came on fresh signs, and 
about noon, going very cautiously, they came to many fresh tracks of men 
and dogs. Here they waited until nightfall, and then followed a beaten 
snowshoe-track which led them before long to within sight of the Chilcotin 
campfire. They found the enemy camped in a large oblong lodge made of 
logs, and covered with brush, earth, and snow, and having an entrance 
covered with mats at each end. They now arranged as to the manner of 
attack. Ka'kxa was to take one door, and Tahu'thutyen the other; while 
the second brother was to stay a little distance from the lodge to cover 
their retreat, and prevent any one who might be outside from surprising 
them. On arriving near the lodge, the dogs became aware of them, for 
they had approached down-wind, and began to howl. The men retreated 
hurriedly, and not too soon, for a party of men emerged from the lodge 
and scoured the timber in their direction. Not finding anything, they 
returned, and the dogs soon became quict. Now, the Shuswap made a

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 545 
détour, and, waiting until nearly midnight, approached from the opposite 
direction, travelling up-wind. Ka'kxe being somewhat nervous, Tahu'tthutxen 
took the lead. They moved very stealthily, and all three took up their 
positions without disturbing the dogs. Both door-covers being somewhat torn, 
the two Shuswap could take aim with their guns without moving the covers. A large fire was burning brightly, and very few of the people had as yet 
retired. Singling out a man apiece, they fired with deadly results. Now 
they tore away the door-covers, and Ka'kxa commenced to shoot arrows 
through one entrance; while Tahu'hutxen, who had a double-barrelled gun, discharged it again, killing another man. The men inside rushed for their 
weapons, while the women threw water and earth on the fire to put it out. 
It was some time, however, before the house was completely dark. The Chilcotin were afraid to escape by the doors; but some got out over the 
roofs, while the majority kept up a heavy fire of ball and arrows against 
both doors. The brother on guard at the back of the lodge shot one of the 
escaping Chilcotin, and, reloading, shot another on the roof. The Shuswap 
now retreated, leaving Ka'kxa about fifty yards away from the door he had 
occupied. He was apparently dead, so the brothers took his gun and made 
off as fast as they could. Ka'kxa was covered with blood, and lay uncon- 
scious for a considerable time. He was badly wounded, a ball having entered 
his right side and come out close to the nipple. He had also received a 
charge of small shot in the breast, and the flesh of his left side had been 
torn by an arrow. When he regained consciousness and found that he had 
been deserted, he travelled as best he could all night, but many times he 
lay down and became unconscious. Meanwhile the brothers travelled almost 
constantly night and day, as they expected to be pursued when the Chilcotin 
should learn how small was the party that had attacked them. Arriving at 
their homes, they told their story, and there was lamentation at the supposed 
death of Ka'kxa. His two wives cut their hair and went into mourning. His favorite horse was shot, and his two dogs were hanged. A couple of 
days afterwards a man was seen approaching the camp slowly. While still 
a considerable distance away, he stopped under a tree and lay down. A 
young man was sent out to see who it was, and soon returned with the 
news that it was Ka'kxa in a very weak condition. The brothers and 
others went out and carried him in. He was much exhausted, and his body 
was covered with dried clots of blood. His buckskin shirt was stiff with the 
blood which had dried on it. For a long time he hovered between life and 
death, ‘but at last gained strength, and his wounds healed. He told how he 
had struggled along, with frequent rests and faints, expecting the Chilcotin 
to overtake and kill him at any time. He thought he should meet death 
at their hands, or die of weakness and hunger, before he reached home. 
He had no food, and no weapon excepting a knife, but he drank often at

----

546 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the streams. It was afterwards learned that the Chilcotin men had looked 
around next day, and, finding the pool of blood where the Shuswap had 
lain, had followed the trail for some distance; but not overtaking him, and 
being doubtful of the real numbers of the attacking party, they were afraid 
they might fall into an ambush if they followed too far. Thus ended the 
last war-expedition made by the Shuswap against the Chilcotin; and although 
from six to eight Chilcotin were killed, and several more wounded, they 
never paid back the score. Next summer Ka'kxa was one of the attractions 
at the annual Shuswap gathering at Green Lake, when, wearing the same 
shirt in which he had been wounded, he recounted his adventures over many 
a pipeful of tobacco. All the participants in this affair have long been dead. 
Following are a few other accounts of warsstories. An old man of the 
North Thompson division gave this account of their wars with the Sekanai: — 
In our grandfathers’ time the North Thompson people had many wars 
with the Sekanai, who came down from the north, a very large band of 
them occupying the country around the head waters of the Fraser River 
from its source to the ‘Big Bend” where they hunted and fished. They 
made this place their headquarters for several years, and the Shuswap made 
no great efforts to drive them out, for the fisheries there were of little value, 
and were never used, because the people had much better ones on the 
North Thompson River, where the fish were fatter and more plentiful. 
The country of the Upper Fraser River was part of the Shuswap hunting- 
grounds, and abounded in game and fur-bearing animals. The Sekanai had 
not been there long, before they murdered a party of three or four men 
who were hunting near their main settlement. Soon after that, they appeared 
on the Upper North Thompson River, and for several years annoyed the 
Shuswap by stealing from them and murdering several people. They would 
also send active young men far down the river as spics, and also to steal 
berries and gather arrowstone, which does ‘not occur on the upper Fraser 
River. On one occasion some of these youths came as far down as a point 
about twenty-five miles above Kamloops, where they were discovered; but 
they were so fleet of foot that they made good their escape. Another time 
some men were discovered about thirty-five miles above Kamloops. They 
were pursued, and a very fleet Shuswap killed one of them. 
About this time a Cree war-party found a camp of Sekanai near the 
head of Fraser River, and killed a number of people. Later the Shuswap, 
while fishing and huntiog near the head of North Thompson River, were 
repeatedly attacked by large parties, who killed a number of people and 
drove the others down the river, taking possession of their fisheries. 
Then the North Thompson people sent a warparty against them, killed several of them, and drove them across the divide to the head of 
Fraser River, but were afraid to follow them farther.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 547 
The following year a considerable number of Shuswap were fishing, as 
usual, at their famous salmon-fishery called Peskalallen (Salmon-Place), on the 
Upper North Thompson River. Here they were attacked by a large party of Sekanai, who killed many of them and took some women away as slaves. 
Now, the North Thompson people were thoroughly aroused, and asked 
the warlike people of the Fraser River division and of Kamloops to come 
to their aid. Many warriors came from these places, including one noted 
war-chief from Kamloops and three from Fraser River. One of the latter 
was elected war-chief of the whole party, which included some men from 
every band of Fraser River, even five or six from Soda Creck. The 
warriors found the Sckanai at a spot near the head of Fraser River. They 
surrounded them, and attacked them at night, and killed all except one man. 
They recovered the Shuswap women who had been made slaves. They cut 
two gashes down each cheek of their prisoner, stripped him naked, and gave 
him a firedrill. Then they said to him, ‘We have branded you with the 
Shuswap mark on your face. Go now and tell your people what we have 
done to your friends. Let them know that if they ever show themselves 
again, we will do the same to them, for we are a powerful people and have 
many warriors.” There was snow on the ground, and the weather was very cold; but 
the Sekanai, who was a man in his prime, reached his people. He travelled 
fast, and at night slept on brush between two fires. The Sekanai thought 
that the Shuswap had turned back, but they had followed the man's tracks, 
and thus were led to a large Sekanai camp some distance down Fraser 
River, probably near the Big Bend. Here were encamped nearly half of 
the whole Sekanai tribe. The rest were living away north, where the tribe 
lives at the present day. The Shuswap surrounded them, and at daybreak 
attacked them suddenly from four sides, killing nearly all of them. Five or 
six men escaped, and about twenty or thirty young women and a few young 
men were made prisontrs. The Shuswap put their mark on one of the 
latter, and sent him off, in the same way they had the first one. Among 
those who escaped was the man whom they had branded on the previous 
occasion. After ‘taking everything of value, they destroyed the lodges and 
all the property that they did not want. They tied the bodies of the children 
together in pairs and hung them over branches; others they impaled on the 
ends of Sckanai spears, which they stuck up in the snow. Then they 
started for home, making the slaves carry loads of provisions, robes, and 
other booty. They did not take any of the enemy's weapons, for these 
were considered inferior to their own, especially the bows and arrows, which 
were not nearly as well made, nor as powerful, as those of the Shuswap. 
The arrow-heads were large, and their arrows could generally be seen flying 
through the air.

----

548 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
In this expedition the Shuswap had only three men wounded. The 
slaves had to carry one of these, a middle aged man. He was badly 
wounded; and when they reached the head of the North Thompson River, they thought he would die. He asked to be burned, as was the custom of warriors who could not recover. Therefore they collected a large pile of 
dry wood, and, placing him on the top, they set fire to it. He sang a 
warsong and brandished his spear until he was choked by the smoke and 
flame. They took the remains of his bones home to be buried there. 
When they arrived near Teektcekwa'llk, on the east bank of the North 
Thompson River, about fifty miles above Kamloops, they were feasted by 
the people amid much acclamation and dancing. The slaves were divided, 
and the whole party scattered. Some men of the northern Fraser River 
bands took their slaves along with them; but the warriors from the southern 
Fraser River and from Kamloops gave their slaves to the North Thompson 
people, who had suffered so much from the Sekanai. These slave women 
were made the wives of men on the North Thompson River; and, as they 
nearly all had many children, there is some Sekanai blood there now, and 
the men of Sekanai descent are still known as such. The Sekanai never 
came into the Shuswap country again, and never took revenge for the heavy 
blow they had received, for since that time they have always been a small 
and insignificant tribe. This whole war may have lasted about ten years. The final attack, in 
which the Shuswap war-party almost completely exterminated the Sekanai, who had taken up their abode on Shuswap grounds, took place probably about 1790. Sir Alexander Mackenzie mentions seeing, in 1793, a Sckanai 
woman and man, evidently slaves, among the Soda Creek Shuswap at 
that time. i 
About the same period the following incident may have happened: — At a time when horses were still scarce in the Shuswap country, a 
party of Fraser River Shuswap were fishing somewhere near the head of 
Bridge Creek. Not far from this spot was a fine piece of root-digging 
ground, close to a place where members of the Lake division generally had 
a fishingcamp. An elderly woman, the wife of a chief, went there one 
day on horseback to gather roots, intending to camp at night with the Lake 
people. Upon repairing there at evening, however, she found them gone, 
and she had to camp alone. She slept under a tree, and staked her horse 
close by, behind some bushes. During the night a small party of Sekanai (or Iroquois) approached 
with the intention of stealing dried trout. They thought the Shuswap were 
there fishing. Each time they tried to approach, the horse snorted and 
scared them back. They discovered that there were no people except the 
woman, whom they tried to capture. Again they attempted to approach the 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 549 
woman, and crawled noiselessly through the grass; but the horse became 
aware of them, and snorted louder than before. They became afraid, because 
they did not know what it was, and left. 
Afterwards they related the story to some North Thompson Indians, stating how the Shuswap woman had a strange powerful mystery, which 
snorted and pawed the earth whenever they approached, making them so 
afraid that they had run away. When daylight came, the woman saddled her horse, rode home, and 
told her people what had happened. Some men hastened to the place and 
followed the Sekanai, but, being unable to overtake them, they returned to 
the fishing-camp on the third day. The Fraser River Shuswap tell the following about their wars with the 
Carrier: — A very long time ago there were one or two short wars between the 
Shuswap of Soda Creck and Williams Lake and the Carrier of Alexandria 
and Quesnel. Later on the Carrier and Shuswap were always friendly and 
occasionally allies. The Carrier of Fraser River and the Chilcotin were 
often at war, and frequently murdered each other's hunting-parties. Sometimes 
a few Shuswap would help the Carrier in expeditions against their enemies. 
Once a large warparty of Chilcotin killed a number of Carrier near 
Alexandria. The Hudson Bay Company gave the Alexandria people axes, 
so that they might build a large stockade for their protection. They also 
supplied them with a number of muskets and plenty of ammunition. The 
Alexandria people then made up a large war-party to raid the Chilcotin; and 
five noted Shuswap warriors from Williams Lake and Soda Creek joined 
them. The whole party were in the stockade ready to start in the morning, 
when suddenly at night a large party of Chilcotin attacked the house, and 
tried to tear down the logs. They were surprised, however, to find so many 
men there, and many of them with guns, and soon beat a retreat, pursued 
by the Carrier and Shuswap. The Chilcotin travelled very quickly, and at 
last split up into a number of small parties. The Carrier followed for a 
long distance, but, not being able to find any of them, they turned back. 
In this engagement a number of Chilcotin were killed and badly wounded, 
while on the other side two Carrier and one Shuswap were slightly wounded. 
The Shuswap claim that the Chilcotin, when attacked, always retired to the 
woods, and were very hard to find. 
The Shuswap living on Fraser River have also accounts of their wars 
with the Cree: — 
Once a party of Cree, about ten in number, were attacked by a war-’ 
party of Shuswap while in camp. All of them were killed, with the exception 
of one lad, who hid in the bushes, and finally escaped in the dark. The 
Shuswap followed him for four days, but could not overtake him. When

----

550 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
he reached home, he told his story, and shortly after he had finished, he 
dropped down dead. 
For a number of years, about four or five generations ago, many war- 
parties of Cree invaded the Shuswap country. In a southeast direction they 
almost reached Kamloops, and farther west they went as far south as the 
lakes at the head of the Bonaparte River and Bridge Creek. They also 
reached the Fraser River at a number of points between Canoe Creek and 
Soda Creek. After this succession of invasions, their war-parties only appeared 
occasionally. They were very warlike, and numbered more tall men among 
them than the Shuswap. The latter, however, considered themselves more 
active, faster travellers, and equally as good warriors. The Cree were noted 
for their long hair, their woodcraft, and their proficiency in the sign language. Their war-parties seldom carried food with them, and depended almost entirely 
on what game they could shoot or snare. Their clothes, snowshoes, and 
weapons were similar to those used by the Shuswap. The Cree bow was considered equal to that of the Shuswap. lt was of the style of the 
Okanagon bow, which was also used by many Thompson and some Shuswap Indians, but was longer, and had spear-points inserted at the ends, and could 
be used for stabbing. The Cree arrows had large, long feathers, and were 
considered clumsier and much inferior to those of the Shuswap. In these wars the Cree at different times killed many people of the Lake 
and North Thompson divisions, and also a good many of the Fraser River 
Shuswap. On the whole, however, they had the worst of it, and at last 
ceased coming, for the Shuswap annihilated several large parties of them. 
Once a war-party of Cree came down the North Thompson valley to a 
place about fifteen miles from Kamloops. Here they were noticed; and 
a famous warrior called Selpa’en, who lived there, hurriedly gathered up a 
party to fight them. The Cree began to run when they saw the Shuswap 
coming, and the latter pursued them. 
One of the Cree made the sign of a woman's privates to the Shuswap, 
who were leading. After a long and hard run, the flectest of the latter 
drew near to the slowest of the Cree, and the two parties commenced to 
shoot arrows at one another as they ran. One of the Shuswap hit a Cree 
in the foot with an iron-tipped arrow, which disabled him so much that he 
was soon left behind by his party. When the Shuswap came up with him, 
they clubbed and killed him. 
He was a very tall man, and had extraordinarily long hair. They 
stretched his body full length on the ground, and drove in two pegs, — 
one at the soles of his feet, and onc at the crown of his head. They also 
stretched his hair out full length from his head, and drove in another peg 
where the tips of his hair reached. After scalping him, they buried him at 
this spot, close to the trail. Many people afterwards visited this place to see

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 551 
the length of the body and hair of the Cree warrior that had been killed. 
His scalp was kept for many years and exhibited, to show the wonderful 
length of the hair. From this event the place was named Skqaumuxt¢‘tus 
(“Cree little trail). 
Another time a warparty of twenty or more Cree came down to one 
of the lakes at the head of Bonaparte River, and killed some people who 
were fishing there. They then went to Alkali Lake, arriving at a time when 
nearly all the men were absent at a potlatch near the mouth of Chilcotin 
River, given by. the Cafion people. Two girls happened to sce the Cree, 
and reported to the others. 
As soon as it became dusk, they sent two young women to cross Fraser 
River and inform the men; while the rest of the women beat drums, sang, 
and danced a wardance in imitation of men. They kept this up all night; 
while a few of them dug holes, and busied themselves burying some of 
their food and valuables. Just before daybreak the women took their children, and all ran away. . Thinking that many men were there, the Cree 
were afraid to attack, and waited until daybreak, when they found that the 
camp was deserted, and took possession. 
Meanwhile the men who were at the potlatch, with their friends the 
Cation people, had crossed the Fraser River in the night-time, to the number 
of fully a hundred, and had taken positions around the camp to cut off the 
Cree. When day broke in the morning, they saw the latter feasting in the 
camp on the dried fish and salmon-oil that they had found. Some of them 
were engaged doing up parcels of dried salmon to take with them; while 
others were gathering wood and bark, and piling them around the houses 
preparatory to setting them on fire. Now, the Shuswap made the attack 
upon them from four directions, and, taking the Cree by surprise, they killed 
them all, with the exception of one lad, whom they told to go home and 
tell his people how the party ended, and warn them never to attack the 
Shuswap again. Some say that another boy was spared, and kept as a slave. 
The first war-party of Cree that came to Alkali Lake took the people 
by surprise in the early morning, and killed nearly forty of them. At the 
same time they took away a number of women as slaves. A few years 
afterwards a party of them, numbering nearly seventy, emboldened by this 
success, and led by a noted Cree warrior, appeared again. After killing a 
family on the North Thompson River and a number of Shuswap of the 
Lake division, they suddenly swooped down on Alkali Lake, and surprised 
some of the people there, killing ten or more, and taking two young women 
as slaves. Most of the people escaped, however, and runners were sent to 
the south and west to tell what had happened, and to ask warriors to come up. Niti} a noted war chief of the people from High Bar to Canoe Creek, 
    
Seep. 55.

----

552 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
who had lately led a number of successful expeditions against the Lillooet, 
came up with four of his best warriors, and organized a war-party of over 
sixty men. It was in the middle of winter, and the Cree had a long start: therefore 
the Shuswap knew they would have to follow many days, and travel very 
far, before they could overtake them. Accordingly they carried a number 
of light packs of dried salmon for food. The Cree were travelling very 
fast, and the Shuswap did not scem to gain on them much. The food they 
had taken with them soon gave out, and now they had to live on what 
game they happened to get, and on the beaver-meat which their enemies 
left behind them. 
The Shuswap persevered, however, as the pace of the Cree slackened, 
owing to their having to hunt beaver for food, and to their sense of security as they neared their own country. They were evidently successful in their 
beaver-hunting, and carried little or nothing with them, for at each of their camps they left a great deal of beaver-meat behind. This helped their 
pursuers, as it gave them almost sufficient to supply their wants, and made 
it unnecessary for them to spend time scarching for food. They were 
now in the Rocky Mountains, near the Cree country, when at last the Shuswap 
caught up with them. An old man and his grandson had been unable to kecp up with the 
main party, and were travelling one day behind. They had drawn aside off 
the trail to camp the night before, and now in the morning were preparing 
to go ahead again. Just then a wounded caribou ran past with two Shuswap 
arrows in its body; and the boy said to his grandfather, “A wounded caribou 
runs past with two arrows having very small feathers” The old man, who 
was half blind, said, “They must be Shuswap arrows. Undoubtedly we are 
being pursued.” Soon afterwards they heard the noise of snowshoes following 
along on the Cree trail, and they lay flat down. There was a large fallen 
log across the trail near by, and the old man counted the noise made by 
the snowshoes as cach warrior jumped over the log, in all about sixty. 
The old man now sent the boy in great haste to warn the party, while he 
himself followed up behind the Shuswap. When the boy related everything, the Cree chief laughed, and said, 
“I cannot believe that. Your eyes must be bad. The Shuswap would never 
follow us so far” The girls who had been made slaves noticed the people 
talking, and, hearing them speak about Shuswap, they thought their friends 
might be following them. They always walked behind the Cree party, 
carrying small packs of food. On the next day, as they travelled along, 
they tore off pieces of cedar-bark, and left them as signs on the trail. About 
dusk the Shuswap overtook the women, and, walking in the timber along- 
side of them, they questioned them in undertones. The women answered,

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 553 
“The Cree are a large party of nearly seventy. The fastest of them are 
camping by this time, while the slowest ones are just a little ahead of us. 
Every night they make us sit up a long time drying all their snowshoes 
for them” 
The Shuswap told them to hold the snowshoes that night at the fire, so as to burn the netting, and afterwards to mix up the shoes of different 
sizes. (The Cree used a permanent shoe attached to their snowshoes, made 
to fit the foot.) 
The women did this, and at dawn the Shuswap attacked the Cree, who were quite unprepared, many of them still sleeping. Now there was great 
confusion in the camp as the men tried to snatch up their weapons and snowshoes. Some put on one snowshoe, but could not find the other; others - 
ran without any; while those who managed to get on a pair found them 
useless, for the netting, being burned, fell out or tore. The Shuswap attacked 
them with bows and arrows, and followed this up by charging the camp. 
The Cree were unable to make any defence; and those who were not killed fled in all directions, pursued by the Shuswap. 
Some were wounded and crawled into the timber or among bushes, but 
all were tracked and tomahawked. Some climbed up into trees, where they 
died or were shot. A number of the most stalwart, who were unhurt or slightly wounded, tried hard to escapes but the Shuswap overtook them as 
they were crossing a large patch of smooth ice without snow. Here they 
would slip and fall; and the Shuswap killed them all with their arrows, 
excepting three, who managed to get across, one of whom at least was 
wounded." The Shuswap returned to the Cree camp, where they feasted on beaver- 
meat, and then started home, taking the women with them. They also took some robes and a few of the best bows of the Crees but the arrows they 
considered worthless. They spared the life of the old man, but they killed his grandson. 
None of the Shuswap were killed, and only one man, called Talexa'n, 
was wounded, who received an arrow in the arm; and another had cut the 
sinew at the back of his foot. The latter wound incapacitated him from 
walking, and the people carried him by turns. He had his relatives partly 
at Kamloops and partly on Fraser River. 
On the return journey the Shuswap had stormy weather, and were often 
without food. Talexa’n, who had been carried many days, asked his friends to 
kill him, as he was a drag on the party; but at first they would not hear 
of this. One day he said again, “You are getting weak. Your progress is 
  
| This fight is said to have taken place somewbere in the eastern fanks of the Rockies, not fa from the Yellow Head Pass.

----

554 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
slow, and you have no food” (They were then in a piece of country where 
there was no game) ‘I am a drag on you, and I know 1 shall never get 
well again. Perhaps some of you may die if you do not hurry. My heart 
will be glad if you kill me, for thus I shall save you. I shall die proudly, 
for many of our enemies, the Cree, have been killed as an offering at my 
grave. Surely no warrior ever had so many killed on account of his death.” Then his friends gathered wood and made a large pyre, on the top of 
which they placed Talexan. When they sct fire to it, he commenced to sing his war-song, and continued to sing until the flames reached him, when 
he wrapped his robe around his head, and died. They gathered up what 
remained of his bones, and took the ashes with them to be buried. The 
party reached home without further mishap, although many of them were 
rather thin. 
The following is an account of a war with the Chilcotin: — 
The country between the head of Bridge River, Fraser River, Chilcotin 
River, and Chilco Lake, was very dangerous ground formerly. Here 
Shuswap, Lillooet, and Chilcotin hunting-parties were liable to meet, and 
often attacked one another. One time, before guns were plentiful, two men 
from Canoe Creek went there into the high mountains to trap marmots, in 
the season just before the salmon-run. One was an old man who had a 
bad reputation for stealing; the other was a young man, and a very good 
fellow. They were armed with bows and arrows only. They found the 
marmot-traps of a party of Chilcotin, and the old man robbed their traps. 
Then he joined the young man, and they departed for home. The Chilcotin 
pursued them, and overtook them at a place where there are many rocky 
buttes. Here they killed them, and buried their bodies at the foot of a 
rock-slide. As the ‘two hunters did not return, their friends sent a party 
to look for them, but they searched in vain. One of their relatives was a 
man belonging to Canoe Creek, — now a very old man. Thinking that 
the Chilcotin had probably murdered the two hunters, he set out the following 
year with one companion, and penetrated into the mountains. Reaching the 
real hunting-ground of the Chilcotin, near Chilco Lake, they happened to 
see two men of that tribe walking along the hillside below them, carrying 
small packs. One of them was a large man, who was carrying a gun. 
Telling his companion to shoot if he should miss, the Shuswap waited until 
the two men were in line, when he fired, and killed them both with one ball 
Leaving the bodies lying there, they took the gun and returned home. 
Some time afterward it was learned, through the people of the Cafion 
division, how two Canoe-Creek Indians had been killed: so a war-party of Shuswap went out to have revenge. They came down on several parts of 
the Upper Chilcotin River and Chilco Lake without finding any people; but 
on their way home, at a place called Xwalxastcin, they came on a small

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 555 
party of Chilcotin digging roots, and killed them all, — men, women, and 
children. 
Wars with the Lillooet continued for quite a number of years. Once a small party of Lillooet were killed by Chilcotin on the upper 
part of Bridge River. A Shuswap party happened to be near there at the 
time, and friends of the Lillooet blamed them for the murder. They sent 
out a warparty, and killed a number of Empire Valley people who were 
camped near the Red Bluffs, or “Breasts,” between Empire Valley and Churn 
Creek mouth. It was wintertime, and the Lillooet had come up through 
the Shuswap country on the east side of the Fraser River, keeping back in 
the timbered plateau. They found no small camps, and were afraid to 
attack the large camps. When they reached a little below Canoe Creek, 
they noticed smoke ascending from the camp at the Red Bluffs, and made 
up their minds to reconnoitre there. At night they passed around the large 
camp of people at Canoe Creek, and crossed the Fraser River on the ice 
between there and Dog Creek. It was very cold, calm weather at the time. 
Finding about twenty people in the camp at the “Breasts.” they lay in wait 
to attack it at night. Just before daybreak, when the people were all asleep, 
they burst into the lodges, and killed them all, excepting one old woman, 
who got out with a little child and hid under a log, and a young man who 
happened to be away training that night. After this, the Shuswap war chicf, 
Nitti, led four or five large war-expeditions against the Lillooet, and killed 
very many of them. He raided the whole of the Lillooet country, and on 
one expedition went as far as Douglas, killing many people, burning houses 
and caches, and bringing back a number of slaves. After this the Lillooet 
never killed any more northern Shuswap, or sent any war-parties into their 
country. Once, not very long ago, the great Shuswap warrior Ka'xa, with 
one comrade, came upon a party of about twenty-five Lillooet camped at a 
lake near Xwalxastcin, where they occupied one long lodge. In the night- 
time. Ka'xa entered by one door, and his companion by the other, and killed 
more than half the people before they awoke. They slaughtered all men, 
women, and children, until only a baby was left, which Kaa told his 
companion to kill. The young man pitied it so much, however, that he did 
not have the heart to kill it. Then Ka'xa, saying it would die anyway, 
took a rootdigger, and, sharpening the point, stuck it through the babe’s 
stomach, pinning it to the ground. This warrior was very cruel, and also 
fearless, and delighted in killing Lillooet and Chilcotin. Many people thought 
him too reckless and bloodthirsty, therefore he never had much of a following. 
Human bones were lying around for many years where he had slaughtered 
the Lillooet at Xwalxa'stein. Another Shuswap war chief who raided the 
Lillooet was Nkekitsa. He did this because his uncle had been killed by 
Lillooet when he himself was a boy. When he grew to be a man, about

----

556 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
fifteen or twenty years after his uncle's death, he took the war-path against 
the Lillooet, and he and his warriors must have killed fifty of them in 
revenge for the one man’s death. It may not have been this altogether, 
however; for the Lillooet were considered poor warriors and casy prey, and 
much spoil was to be gained by raiding them. 
The following tale shows that the Lillooet Indians were held in very 
low esteem: — 
One spring some Lillooet Indians near The Fountain were removing 
their dried salmon from the cellars in which they had been cached during 
the winter. A number of Shuswap who were visiting in’ that locality looked 
on. They sat down a little distance off, and in no way attempted to molest 
the Lillooet. These, however, were suspicious of the Shuswap; and two of 
their men, with arrows on string, watched them, with the intention of shooting 
the Shuswap if they should interfere. At this time a famous Shuswap warrior 
called Xaa'kst (Cut-off-Hand) joined his friends. He said to them, “Why do 
you sit here like fools while the Lillooet remove their fish? You should 
take a share. You need not be afraid: they are only Lillooet, and are of 
no account. Watch how I make them run” Going up to the Lillooet, he said to them, ‘I am Cutof-Hand, the great Shuswap warrior, and these are 
my fish. How dare you try to remove my property! Begone or I shall kill 
you all” Then, taking up the backbone part of a salmon, he struck one of the men holding the bow and arrow across the face with it. The Lillooet 
left without offering resistance, and the Shuswap took possession of the 
salmon, which they carried to their camp. 
1 have also received an account of a war with the Thompson Indians: — 
A war sprang up between the northern Shuswap and the Thompson River Indians in the following manner. Four Shuswap belonging to Canoe 
Creek went down to The Fountain to gamble, and a number of Lillooet were also there. The Canoe-Creek men stole, or were thought te have 
stolen, some things from the Lillooet, and were pursued by six of the latter, 
who overtook them on Pavilion Mountain. The Shuswap asked why they 
had followed them; and the Lillooet answered, ‘We just followed you to 
exchange or buy things from you” They had their weapons hidden, and 
one of them had a stone war-club hidden which hung by a string around 
the neck and down his back. He was wearing a thick cloak. After sitting 
and talking some time, this man stood up and pretended to take off his 
cloak to exchange it with one of the Shuswap. At the same time he 
advanced close to the latter. Suddenly he pulled out his club and dealt the 
Shuswap a terrific blow on the head, knocking him down. The six Lillooet 
then attacked the three remaining Shuswap, who fled. One of the latter, 
who was very fleet of foot, bothered the pursuers by shooting arrows at 
them, and then running and overtaking his comrades. Being unable to

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 557 
overtake them, the Lillooet returned to where they left the wounded Shuswap. 
During their absence he had gone down a steep bluff to the river. They 
searched for him, but were unable to find him. Next day a Bonaparte Shuswap saw him, and told the Lillooet where 
he was, saying, “If you do not kill him, his friends will seek revenge” 
Then the Lillooet went out and killed him. 
This man’s death was not avenged for a long time; but at last a nephew 
of his, called Nkeki'tsa,' grew up, and became a noted runner, jumper, and 
shooter, but as yet had not become a warrior of any note. Now, the season came around when the Shuswap went to their great 
gathering-place at Green Lake. This year a very large number went, 
including very many of the Bonaparte people. with whom went some Upper 
Thompson Indians. Among the latter was a noted elderly warrior called 
Sa'mel, or Swmel, belonging near Lytton. This man had been a noted 
warrior, and was covered with scars. One day he said in the presence of 
Nkeki'tsa and some other people of the Fraser River division, “The Shuswap 
say that the Canoe-Creck band are great fighters, yet it is now many years 
since one of their number was killed by the Lillooet, and none of them ever 
sought to avenge his death” Nkekitsa felt nettled, and answered, “Do not 
mention the name of my dead!” Sa'mel paid no attention, but kept on, 
saying, “The Canoe Creek men cannot be very powerful, or brave warriors, 
when they are afraid to avenge the death of a friend” Nkekitsa said, 
“Stop! Let the dead alone. Do not laugh at my dead, and mock my 
friends.” Never heeding, Sa'mel continued, “The Canoe Creek men must be 
women, when they are afraid of the Lillooet, whose men are worse than 
women.” Nkeki'tsa said, “My uncle was killed because his enemies got the 
advantage of him. If your enemies had gotten the advantage of you, you 
would have fared just as badly” Sa‘mel replied, “No! no women like the 
Lillooet can get the best of me. If your uncle had been a Thompson Indian and had been killed by Lillooet, his tribe would have had: revenge 
long ago. They would not allow women like the Lillooet to kill their 
warriors” Then Sa‘mel challenged the crowd, and showed his scars, saying, 
“These scars were not made by women. I am a Thompson warrior, and no 
one can kill me?” Nkeki'tsa answered, “You have fought with women! If a 
man fought with you, he would soon kill you” Sa‘met retorted, “No man 
can kill me, much less Lillooet or Canoe Creek men, who are all women!” 
Nkeki'sa went away feeling much insulted. He had taken Sa'mel’s 
words very much to heart. He said to his friends, “I will kill that Thompson 
warrior for insulting me, and afterwards I will avenge my uncle's death, and 
show that I am not afraid of the Lillooet” His friends agreed that he 
should do.as he had said. 
    
See pass.

----

558 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
The night before the people were to separate, Nkekitsa asked two 
young women to go and play through the night with Sa‘mel, so that he 
should be sleepy in the morning. He also induced some young men to 
prompt him in the morning to cat a big meal, so that he should be heavy. On the next morning, when Sa‘met was eating fish, they said to him, “You 
had better cat plenty now at the last. You are leaving to-day, and will 
not be able to get any food as good as that in your country.” Samet took 
this in joke, but ate much more than usual. Some time before this, Nkeki'tsa 
had hidden a small Okanagon bow and two “nioks’ arrows in the roof of 
the long lodge which the Bonaparte and Thompson people occupied. Then 
he crept around, and, watching a chance when Sa'met was standing with his 
right side fully exposed, he snatched down the bow, and shot him twice 
between the ribs, the arrows going right through him. Sa‘mel fell down, 
but, rising again, drew a large knife and rushed among the people, stabbing 
right and left, and wounding many, including some women, and even his 
own friends. In the confusion, Nkeki'sa jumped out over the roof of the 
lodge, and escaped with two of his friends, who had a horse waiting for 
him. Some of Sa‘mef's friends followed them, but soon returned, especially as 
they saw that many of the northern Shuswap looked ugly. At noon next 
day Sa'met died. 
Not long afterward a Thompson war-party, bent on revenge, raided the 
northern Shuswap, and killed a number of people. Then Nkeki'tsa led a 
war-party against the Thompson Indians of Lytton, and thus war-parties of 
these tribes attacked one another at intervals, until about forty-five years - 
ago. A number were killed on both sides, but no side inflicted heavy 
defeats on the other, as in the Lillooct and Cree wars. Once a large party of Lytton Indians came to Canoe Creek, but failing 
to surprise the people, or to fire their houses, they besieged them for several 
days. At last they left, killing a few stragglers on their way back. After- 
wards Nkeki'tsa led a number of expeditions against the Lillooet, and, killing 
many of them, thus avenged his uncles death. The Lillooet, however, never 
sent any parties in return, as did the Thompson Indians. 
A number of tales refer to quarrels of the Shuswap among themselves. 
A few of these may find place here. Sowd'xexken was a Shuswap warrior belonging to the Fraser River. 
He was noted as a bad man, rash, cruel, treacherous, selfish, and bloodthirsty. 
He killed many Carrier and Shuswap, some of the latter relatives of his 
own; and the people were much afraid of him. He killed people in passion 
and without the slightest provocation. Sometimes he would take young men 
away, and force them for a time to be his slaves or servants. If they 
refused to do what he told them, he would often stab and kill them. He 
stole many horses from other people, and gambled them away, or killed

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 559 
and ate them. He seldom had any horses of his own, yet he never lacked 
a horse to ride. 
One day he camped with two relatives of his, who were well-known 
warriors, by name Ani'na and New'sesken. They treated him very hospitably. 
He had with him a young man belonging to Alkali Lake, whom he used 
as a companion and servant. Both were on foot. 
By this time he had come to be so much disliked, that there remained 
few people in his own country with whom he could camp. The next morning, 
when he left his friends, he stole their two best horses, and travelled on 
northwards. They discovered the theft shortly afterwards, and declared they 
would kill him. Taking two saddle-horses with which to chase him, Anna, 
before starting, told his father-in-law, who was a shaman, that he must bewitch 
Sowd'xexken's gun so that it would not shoot, adding, “If by your mystery you do not do this, Iwill kill you when I return.” 
They overtook Sowd'xexken at Upper Chimney Creek, where he was 
shooting grouse, being attracted to the spot by the reports of his gun. 
When the Alkali Lake Indian saw them approaching, he ran away, leaving 
the horse of Sowd'xexken, who was in the timber, on foot, and had just 
shot a grouse. The brothers jumped off their horses and ran towards him. 
When he saw them coming, he was loading his gun and just putting the 
powder in, and either forgot to put in the ball, or thought he would 
intimidate the other men, for he ran out to meet them, pointing his gun at 
them. When they were close, he fired at Ant'na, but, of course, did no 
harm, as there was only powder in his musket. Newrsesken then shot him, 
and he dropped. Anna jumped on him, and, pulling out Sowd’xexken’s 
own knife, drew it across his nose, saying, “Smell that! You have killed 
women long enough, now men and warriors will kill you” Then he stabbed 
him in the breast, running the knife up to the hilt, and left him. 
Shortly afterward some people travelling southward came along and saw his body. They went up to see who it was, and were surprised to find it 
was Sowd'xexken. They hated him, as he had killed some of their relatives, 
and, seeing he was not quite dead, they took a stone and battered in his 
head. Then, cutting off one of his legs, they placed it across the trail. 
His body lay there until the coyotes had eaten most of it, then some of 
his relatives picked up the remains and buried them. No one avenged his 
death, for it was considered just. 
Another quarrel is related as follows: — 
Teeqtcaqé‘qen, a young man belonging to one of the southern bands of 
the Fraser River division, was evil-tempered, overbearing, and quarrelsome. 
At the slightest provocation he would beat, stab, and kick people and pull 
their hair. He was thievish, and had taken away the wives of several men. 
He had two half-brothers or first-cousins, one of whom was named Nexwi‘mken.

----

560 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
They had advised him several times to behave himself, but he gave no heed 
to their counsel. At last they talked over the matter among themselves, and said, “Our relative is indeed very bad, and heeds not our advice. He 
is conducting himself in such a way that very soon some one will kill him. 
Then we shall have to avenge his death’ They agreed to kill him that 
night when he was asleep. Nexwi'mken's brother was to rise before daybreak 
and cough a little, pretending to have a pain in the chest. Then he was 
to take some pitch-wood, light a fire, and pretend to warm himself. As 
soon as the blaze was bright, Nexwimken was to lean over and stab 
Teeqteaq¥‘qen with a large knife. They were all living together at that 
time in a large lodge with a number of other people, and Nexwi‘mken 
generally slept next to Teeqtcaqé'qen. The brothers carried out their plan 
as arranged; but their victim was not easy to kill, and, although stabbed 
many times, he fought very hard. His bowels, liver, and lungs protruded 
through his wounds, and the lodge was spattered with blood. At last, 
however, he seemed to faint. All the people jumped up at the first sounds 
of the struggle, but none of them interfered. They said, “The victim is a 
very bad young man, — so bad that his relatives wish to get rid of him. 
He belongs to them, and has nothing to do with us’ Then a woman called out, “Teeqtcaqé’qen will never die unless you cut his throat” Then 
the brother held Tceqtcagé’qen, while Nexwimken cut his throat. He was 
very much excited, held up the bloody knife, and said, “This knife has not 
only killed my relative, but it will also kill any bad man or warrior who 
thinks himself a match for me. Let any warrior who thinks himself my 
equal walk up and smell of it, as it rests in the hands of a man.’ Then 
an elderly warrior, who was disquieted by the whole proceeding, jumped up, 
gun in hand, and said, “You are not content with murdering your relative, 
but also boast and challenge me.” Then the two brothers fled at once. 
Teeqteaqéqen’s remains were buried that day; but he must have moved in his grave, for the next morning the grave-pole had fallen down and the 
earth over him was cracked. The people claimed that for four days his ghost was very restless and went about the village singing. 
A third story of a similar nature was told to me 
About 1850 there lived three men, Tselixé'sket, Nuxené'sket, and 
Komusé'llet. Their brother had recently died, leaving a widow who was 
young and good-looking. A warrior called Kwul¢'sket carried her away on 
horseback to his brother-in-law's camp near William's Lake. As this action 
was considered quite as serious as the abducting of a married woman, or 
even more so, the three brothers held a consultation as to what they should 
do. One of them was in favor of taking no notice of the matter; while 
another thought there was no néed for immediate action, and it would be 
better to wait until one of them could get a chance to take revenge on

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 561 
Kwulé'sket. Tselix¢’sket would not listen to these proposals, however, and insisted on immediate action, saying, ‘I feel greatly ashamed, and all the 
people will laugh at us if we do not take back our sister-in-law.” 
The brothers now decided to pursue Kwuté'sket. They mounted their 
saddle-horses, and started north for the grounds of the William's Lake 
band. The next day, about noon, they arrived near the camp, and, tying 
up their horses in a grove of small timber, they approached the lodges on 
foot. Tselixe'sket, who was armed with a gun, called to Kwul¢'sket, “You 
are a coward. You run away and hide from us” Kwulé'sket replied, “No, 
1 am here, I do not hide, 1 do not fear you; and immediately he ran out 
carrying a loaded gun, a long machete hanging from his right wrist. As 
the brothers closed in on him, he shot Tselixé’sket dead, dropped his gun, 
and struck Nuxend'sket, who was armed with bow and arrows, with his 
machete, skinning the side of his face and almost cutting off onc ear. The 
weapon sank decp into the shoulder. Komuse'llet, who was a strong man, 
seized Kwule'sket, threw him down, and choked him with one hand, while 
with the other he endeavored to wrench the machete from him. When 
Kwulé'sket's brother-indaw saw that Komusé'llet was getting the best of the struggle, he shot him with his gun, the ball passing through the flesh of one thigh and along the testicles, wounding him badly. Although the two wounded men were now in Kwulé'sket's power, he did not kill them; but he and his friends moved their camp farther to the north, leaving the brothers as they fell. Some people coming along the trail helped them, and carried away Tselixsket’s body for burial. 
Another noted warrior, Sixwilexken of Big Bar, who abducted the wife 
of Sowixexken, was also a renowned warrior, and known as a man of vindictive and revengeful disposition. Sixwilexken's friends advised him to let the woman go, and reminded him that her husband was no ordinary 
man, and would be sure to avenge the insult; but he persisted, and declared 
that he was not afraid of him. Sowd'xexken followed the runaways, and, 
arriving at their camp, he challenged Sixwilexken, saying, “I have come here to fight you. If you are a man, you will meet me; and if you dare not 
come, then all the people will know that you are a woman, and no warrior." 
At first Sixwilexken did not answer; but when Sowd'xexken continued to 
taunt and jeer him, he rushed out of his lodge, armed with a long knife and 
bow and arrows. As he came out, and while aiming an arrow at his enemy, 
Sowd'xexken hit him with an arrow in the right shoulder and disabled him. He hit him with another arrow, which glanced off from the breast-bone. Then Sixwilexken rushed at him, brandishing his knife and uttering his manitou cry; but Sowd'xexken shot him a third time, the arrow entering his bowels. Now Sowixexken threw down his bow and arrows, and ran to meet his adversary, flourishing his short spear, and imitating the cry of the Grisly

----

562 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Bear, his manitou. When they closed, although Sixwilexken was lame in one arm, badly wounded, and, moreover, a smaller and lighter man than 
Sowd'xexken, he knocked the spear out of the latter's hand, threw him down, 
and stabbed him in the arm and hand. Just then he fainted, and Sowd'xexken 
freed himself, wrenched the knife from Sixwilexken's hands, and stabbed 
him to death. 
The following refers to a quarrel in the same band: — 
Kwelté'sket was a great warrior of the lower group of the Fraser River 
division. He was a small active man. His father belonged to the Thompson 
tribe. He had killed many people on war expeditions and in fights. One 
day when he was living with Sixwilexken in the Big Bar district, he had a 
quarrel with a young man, and mortally wounded him. Soon afterwards 
four of his victim's friends — one armed with a tomahawk, one with a long 
dagger, one with a machete, and the fourth with bow and arrows — came 
to Sixwilexken's lodge, and called out, ‘Sixwilexken, do not hide from us 
our enemy.” Kwelté'sket, who was clad only in a breech-clout and moccasins, 
answered, ‘It is not necessary for my friends to hide me, I may be found 
at any time’ Then he rushed out, uttering his manitou cry, and attacked them with a spear. The man who was armed with a bow was standing off 
a short distance from the others, and, as Kwelt¢'sket ran to attack the other 
three, he shot him three times, one arrow passing through the right leg, one hitting and disabling the right arm, and the other entering the body near 
the kidneys. Kweli@'sket, who was now incapable of using his spear, pulled 
a short knife out of the belt which held up his breech-clout, and fought 
with it, holding it in his left hand; but he was no longer a match for the three well-armed men, and soon sank down, struck on the head with the 
tomahawk, his neck and shoulders slashed with the machete, and stabbed in 
the back with the dagger. He was left for dead. 
His mother, who was living in Sixwilexken's camp, came out and 
covered him with a tentmat; for he had often told her that if he died, she 
must cover his body with a tule tent-mat and afterwards bury him wrapped 
in it. None of the people who were looking on interfered during the fight; 
for soma of them, although they considered Kwelté'sket an estimable man in 
many ways, yet were afraid of him. For this reason they did not mind if 
he were killed. Kwelt'sket had been lying under the mat for a couple of 
hours, when a fifth friend of the man he had killed came along, and, raising 
the mat, saw that he was still alive. He said, “I will finish him and stabbed him four times in the breast with a knife, causing much blood to 
flow, and his lungs to protrude. That evening Kwelté'sket was seen to move under the mat, and shortly afterwards threw it off. Rising on his knee, he 
called for water, which the people gave him. His leg and arm were very 
much crippled. He asked for fish, and the people gave him some in a dish.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 563 
He ate it up like a dog. He pushed in the piece of his lung which protruded, 
but it came out again. Then he tore off the piece, saying, “They think they 
can kill me, but I will live to kill them, I am hard to kill. I am no 
ordinary man to die easy” Now he licked the wounds which he could 
reach like a dog, and rubbed saliva on the others. This he did for four 
days, and he felt much better. His wounds even commenced to heal up. 
Then the chief Eoxtoxpa'uz called all the people together, and asked all the 
shamans to sit down in one place. He addressed them, saying, “You know 
that Kwelté'sket is a dangerous man, and has always been known to keep 
his word. You are all aware that he is getting well again, and he has 
declared his intention of killing not only his enemies, but also all their 
women and children. It is useless to try to kill him with weapons. Even 
a bullet has no effect on him, for he has been shot with a gun before. I 
propose that the shamans kill him, for only in this way will he ever be 
disposed of” Then he asked the shamans, one after another, to undertake 
this task, but they all excused themselves. He said to Sixwilexken, “You 
are a powerful shaman and can easily kill him” but Sixwilexken answered, 
“My manitous all help and heal people, they have no power to harm” 
Finally he asked a shaman (whose name has been forgotten) to kill him. 
He answered, “Yes, my manitous have great powers to hurt. If Kwelt¢'sket 
is not dead in two days, then I am no shaman’ In two days Kwelte'sket 
hanged himself.

----

VII. — GAMES AND PASTIMES. 
The games and amusements of the Shuswap were identical with those 
of the Thompson Indians. Dice played with beaverteeth was a favorite 
game of the women. The markings on these were almost always triangular 
lines (on two), short straight lines (on one), and dots (on the fourth). A 
favorite game of the men was played with a number of short sticks, as among 
the Thompson tribe! The ring-game played by the Thompson Indians? was 
very common. The ring-and-dart game was much in vogue, especially among 
boys The lehal game was a great favorite. Sticks were used for beating 
time, and the players wore knuckle-covers. The counters were invariably 
six sticks on each side’ A game of birch-bark cards was played, the cards 
having marks similar to those of the Thompson people. Gradually these 
were altered to correspond to the marks on cards used by the employees of 
the fur companies, and French names were adopted for the various cards. 
Recently, when paper cards came into use, English names were introduced. 
Some old Indians aver that card-games originated in the carly part of 
last century, the Indians copying the cards used by the French half-breeds 
in the employ of the fur companies; or, at least, the Indians received the 
suggestion from them, making cards of their own, and playing them in their 
own way until they learned the European way of playing. Ball-games like 
those of the Thompson Indians were commonly played, that similar to 
lacrosse being the most common. Nearly all the lacrosse-sticks used on 
bare ground were similar to that shown in Fig. 267, a, of Vol. I, p. 278, 
only the end was made more crooked. Lacrossesticks with netting! were 
only used in the wintertime, when the game was played with snow on the 
ground. These netted lacrosse-sticks were also used by children for throwing 
snowballs. Goals were marked with pegs driven into the ground, poles laid 
on the ground, stones, or simply by lines scratched in the ground. The 
opposing parties painted their faces or bodics, each party a different color. 
Thus one party might be painted red, and their opponents yellow or all of 
those on one side white, and those on the other side blue. The ballgame 
described on p. 279 of Vol. I was played by boys, and the kind of cup-and- 
ball game described on pp. 278 and 279 was played by both boys and girls. All these games were played in exactly the same manner as among   
1 See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 272 and 273. Tid, p. 274. + Ibid, p. 475. 4 Tid.) Fig. 267, 6 p. 278. 
(564)

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 565 
the Thompson Indians. Sometimes, instead of playing the ordinary ring-and 
dart game, the ring was thrown up in the air and caught on the end of a 
dart. If a number were playing, those who missed went out; and the game 
continued until the best catcher alone remained, and was declared winner. 
All shooting-games in vogue among the Thompson tribe were also 
played by the Shuswap. One method was to tie up some fir-branches in a 
knot, in size about 15 cm. by 10 cm., and suspend it as a target from the 
limb of a tree, or from one or more poles adjusted for the purpose. The 
distance of range varied according to agreement. Each man had two arrows, 
and the counters were two sticks on each side. If one man hit twice and the other once, the former won one stick, and the shooting continued until 
one man had won over his opponent's two sticks. Shooting at pegs in sandy 
ground and at rings which were set rolling were also common games. 
Wrestling and footracing were much practised, and large bets were 
often made on the contestants. The longest races were upwards of ten 
miles. Tugs of war between teams of various numbers were pulled on 
ropes; and other tugs between two men in sitting posture, holding the middle 
of a stick between them, with the feet of one against the fect of the other, 
were common. Sometimes several men sitting opposite cach other pulled on 
a long pole. It was very common for men to pull against cach other with 
the middle fingers of the right hand, and bets were made on the results. 
Another trial of strength was to sce who could press down the other's hand 
without allowing the elbow to leave the ground. 
Games at long and high jumping were much indulged in. In the 
standing and running high jumps, a rope was held extended by two men. 
The highest running jump done by any men was with the rope held at arm's 
length above the head. The highest standing jump accomplished was with 
the rope level between the tops of the heads (or upper part of the brows) 
of two men of medium height. The next best jump was with the rope held 
level with the eyes, the next level with the chin, and so on to level with 
the belt or belly, which was the lowest standing jump attempted. 
“Putting the stone’ was a common game, the contestants trying who 
could throw it the farthest. Each village had its recognized or standard puttingstone. Lighter stones were thrown at pegs, and rings were also 
thrown at pegs, as in the game of quoits. At the present day horseshoes 
are used instead of rings. When two rings were about equally distant from 
the peg, their distances were measured with the feet if far, with the hand 
if not very far, and by finger-widths when very near by. On some lakes, 
canoeraces were held, and also swimmingraces. Some men could swim 
across Fraser River easily. Horseracing became very common in later days, 
and snowshoe races were sometimes run in the winter. 
Cat's-cradle was played by boys and girls. Some of the common figures

----

566 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
made were the tepee, the eagle, the water-ouzel, the sturgeon, the female 
mountain-sheep, and the ruffed grouse. 
Little toboggans were roughly made of pieces of bark, the older people 
often indulging in the game, but there were many accidents. Frozen hillsides 
were chosen for the slides. Once a young man on a piece of birch-bark was coasting down an icy creek-bottom, and, being unable to stop, shot over 
a fall near the mouth of the creek, alighting on a large sheet of ice floating 
down Fraser River, from which he was rescued by a canoe. 
Gambling was a prominent feature of nearly all games played by adults. 
They seldom played except for a stake. Lehal is the only one of the old games which survives. The ring-and-peg game in a modified form is played 
with horseshoes, and footraces occasionally take place. Horseracing is 
frequent, and gambling with cards not uncommon in some bands.

----

IX. — SIGN LANGUAGE. 
It seems, the sign language of the Shuswap was almost the same as 
that of the Thompson Indians, or perhaps entirely the same; and at one time 
it was used extensively. The younger people nowadays know hardly any of 
it. 1 obtained the following signs among the tribe, all of them the same as 
those described before! as used by the Thompson Indians: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 7, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
35, 36, 38, 41, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 68, 
73, 74, 84, 85. 1 obtained the following new signs, which 1 find were also used by the 
Thompson tribe; and therefore, to avoid confusion, I shall number them 
commencing with No. 88. 
88. Come. — A wave of the hand, as among the whites. 
89. Come quickly! — The same sign as No. 88, made rapidly two or 
three times. 
90. 7 want to speak (with you). — Right hand nearly closed, fore- 
finger pointing upwards, hand raised near to right eye, at same time forefinger 
of left hand pointed towards mouth. 
91. You mustn't. — Same sign as No. 48; only finger raised to right 
eye and shaken. 
02. Don't speak or Don't tell. — Right hand same as No. 91, and closed 
finger-tips of left hand pressed against the mouth, points upwards. 
03. Dumb, astonished, or speechless with astonishment. — The whole 
of left hand pressed against the mouth, points of fingers towards the right. 
94. Two. — First two fingers of right hand held apart and upwards, 
rest of hand nearly closed. 
95. Both, or two together. — The same as No. 94, only fingers close 
to each other. 
96. Three. — Three first fingers of right hand held as in No. 94. 
07. Three together. — Same as No. 96, only fingers close together. 
8. Large flat or prairie. — Both hands held level with breast, palms 
downwards; then moved outwards from each other in horizontal plane (one 
towards each side). 
09. Small flat or prairie. — The same as No. 8, only the hands 
moved inwards towards each other from the sides (the reverse motion of No. 98). 
  
+ See Vol. of his sere, pp 383 et sea. 
(567)

----

568 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
100. Man's privates. — Right hand closed fairly tight, and held, back 
downwards, in front of breast; right middle finger straight and pointing upwards. 
101. Woman's privates. — Thumb of right hand placed between first 
and second fingers of the same hand, the tips of the two fingers touching, 
and the point of the thumb slightly protruding forward. 
102. Sexual intercourse. — Middle of first finger of right hand placed 
between the thumb and first finger of left hand, the point of the thumb 
touching the distal joint of the left forefinger. 
103. Fish. — Hand stretched out, and held horizontally in front of 
breast, palm towards body, and edge of hand down, moving in quick meandering 
motions in horizontal plane. 
104. Many fish. — The same, only both hands used, and fingers 
slightly apart. 105. Come quickly and quietly, or Pay quick attention. — Open hand 
raised to about on a level with the shoulder, then closed and moved rapidly 
downwards across front of body. More or less stooping forward, or crouching, 
often accompanies the movement. 106. Astonishment. — Closed hand placed in front of mouth for two 
or three seconds, the thumb often touching the lips. A gesture is often used 
just before or just after a person has told something he considers wonderful 
or astonishing. ~The open hand is held up, palm towards the person spoken 
to, then it is suddenly closed and brought to the mouth in the same position 
as that just mentioned. 
All the cries in hunting, and signals left at campfires and on trails, 
seem to have been the same as among the Thompson Indians.! The owl-cry 
was very much used by hunters. A “pointer” or “direction” stick left at a 
camp, if entire, told any who saw it that the party had gone a long distance, 
and there would be little chance of overtaking them. If the end was broken 
so that it hung down, then people knew they had not gone far, and could 
easily be overtaken. 
  
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 287 and 288.

----

X. — SOCIAL ORGANIZATION AND FESTIVALS. 
The Shuswap had two distinct types of social organization, — that of 
the north and west, where the people were organized in much the same way 
as the Carrier and Chilcotin; and that of the east and south, where the 
same organization as among the Thompson tribe prevailed. No doubt at 
one time the latter was the typical organization of the entire tribe. The 
bands of Shuswap Lake, of the North Thompson and Kamloops divisions, 
all of the Bonaparte division (excepting the Pavilion band), and the Fraser 
River bands of Empire Valley, Canoe Creek, Big Bar, Kelly Creek, and 
High Bar, had the simple organization characteristic of the Thompson tribe. 
About 1850 the High Bar band was beginning to be influenced by the 
western system. Thus the main body of the tribe maintained its old 
organization, and I shall deal with them first. 
ORGANIZATION OF THE SOUTHERN Banps. -— Like the Thompson Indians, 
they had war chiefs, hunting chiefs, and chiefs of dances, who were men 
elected as the best qualified to fill these positions; and a very few other 
people were called chiefs because of their influence obtained through excellence 
of oratory, wise counsels, wealth, or liberality. Men called chiefs because 
of liberality gave feasts on a large scale more or less frequently, at the 
same time giving presents to the people. These presents were not expected 
to be returned, but were given as free gifts. 
Besides these, however, the Shuswap had one hereditary chief for each 
band, the office descending in the male line. When a chief died leaving 
several adult sons, they, and sometimes also all the immediate male relatives 
of the deceased, held a meeting and elected the son considered best fitted 
to occupy the position, and he was announced by them to the band as chief. 
Soon afterwards he gave a small feast to all the members of the band, to 
which visiting strangers were also invited. At this feast the people addressed 
him as chief, and henceforth recognized him as such until his death. There 
was hardly ever any trouble about the succession. If a chief died leaving 
two adult sons, both very capable and anxious to fill the position, the male 
relatives and the people of the band decided, generally choosing. the elder 
one. A man's son took precedence over all others, — the eldest son, if he 
was capable, and if he was willing to accept the office; failing a son, a 
grandson; and failing a grandson, a brother; and failing a brother, a nephew. 
If a man left a son who was still a child, then his brother succeeded him, 
and the son did not become chief until his uncle died. 
[560] 
 

----

570 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Chicfs had no special privileges, and their only duties were to look after the general welfare of the band, regulating, when necessary, the gathering 
of the food-supply, so that all could have an equal chance, and admonishing 
the lazy and quarrelsome. They also gave their advice on all important 
matters, and were the agents of the band in dealing with strangers. The 
chief was looked upon as a kind of father and leader of the people, and 
was expected to set a good example, and to act fairly in all matters. 
Slaves occupied the same status exactly as among the Thompson Indians, 
their children becoming members of the tribe, and having the same privileges 
as other people. In one case, at least, the grandson of a slave became chicf 
of a band. The hair of slaves was frequently cut. their masters using it 
for making fringes on garments. When a slave married a free woman, 
which was rare, or when a slave-woman had children by a free man, they 
themselves became free, and their hair was no longer cut. 
There was no nobility or privileged classes, neither were there any 
clans or socictics. Consequently there were no crests or totems, nor any 
tradition of a mythological character, defining the origins of families, village 
communities, bands or divisions. It devolved on a man's relatives to avenge his death. If he were killed 
by a stranger, it devolved on his relatives first, and, failing them, on the 
band. In grave or important cases a number of bands, or even the whole 
division, would help. 
As sated in a former chapter? the Caion division were practically 
sedentary, while some bands were almost completely nomadic. The great 
bulk of the tribe, however, were semi-sedentary, but many families did not 
winter habitually in the same place. In this respect they had about the 
same customs as the Upper Thompson Indians. 
Probably over seven-eighths of the individuals of the tribe bear hereditary 
names, many of them of long standing. No two people ina single band 
have the same name at one time, and it is even very rarely that there are 
two of the same name in a whole division. Persons bearing the same 
hereditary name in different divisions and neighboring tribes are often found; 
and these, as among the Thompson tribe, are considered in all cases to have 
inherited their name from a common remote ancestor. Keeping this in view, 
it appears clear, from the large number of names (from about 35 to 65 per 
cent in various bands) common to the Upper Thompson Indians and the 
Shuswap, that these people are of common descent. Either they were one 
people originally, or they have intermarried often. Even in bands that, so 
far as tradition goes, have never lived close together nor had any direct 
intercourse, — like the Lytton band of the Thompson tribe, and the Shuswap 
bands of High Bar and Big Bar, — nearly half of the names are identical.   
Sec Vol 1 of thi series, pr 290. + See p. 460. Footnote 2.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 571 
The names current among the Spences Bridge band of the Thompson 
Indians have greater affinity to those of the Canoe Creek Shuswap than to 
those of some other divisions of the Thompson tribe. 
Less than one-cighth of the Shuswap names have originated in late 
years. These were mostly nick-names and dream-names; and, having once 
been adopted, they became family property, and descended like other names. 
Owing to the decrease in the tribe, there is a great surplus of hereditary 
names in most families, so that a person may sometimes have more thin 
twenty ancestral names to choose from. Many names have died out. 
The naming-ceremonies were the same as among the Thompson tribe, 
but wealthy individuals only gave public feasts when they changed their 
names. About a year or two after a relative had died, the eldest surviving 
male relative called his relatives and friends together, and said, ‘We have a 
name to be kept alive” Then he mentioned the name of the relative to 
whom he consigned the name, saying, “You better bear the name of your 
father” (or uncle, etc., as the case might be). 
It was the duty of the eldest or most influential man of the group of 
families in which the name was hereditary to bestow the names of deceased 
relatives upon their successors. The person receiving the name always gave a small feast to the assembled friends. 
In cases where a family possessing many illustrious names had become 
nearly extinct, — for instance, when only one or two survivors were left, who had few or no children, — one or more of the hereditary names were 
given away. The survivor singled out a friend whom he admired, or some 
one he thought worthy, and said to him, ‘I wish to keep alive the names of 
my illustrious dead, and will give you an illustrious name. If the man 
accepted the name, he gave a small feast to the donor, and was henceforth called by that name, and his descendants could use it. 
A man, if he had no children or nephews, could give his own name to 
a friend not belonging to his family before he died. The name could then 
descend in the stranger's family. When he gave his name away, he presented 
the man with a horse or a robe, and asked him to use his name. The 
man then feasted the people and publicly took the name. Men gave their 
names away in this manner if they valued them, and wished to preserve 
them from extinction. No person could have two names at the same time, 
and he had to use cach name several years before he changed it for another. 
At the present day most Indians, besides their own tribal names, have 
baptismal or other names given to them by the whites. A large percentage 
of these are French. 
The marriage-customs were practically the same as obtained among the 
Thompson Indians, and levirate prevailed! On a man’s demise, as a rule, 
Sen Cheer X  

----

572 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the nearest of kin took all his property, and divided it among all his 
relatives, generally including first-cousins. The widow received nothing; for 
she had to marry the brother of her deceased husband, and did not depend 
on what the latter had left. However, she retained all her own property, 
and very often all the cooking-utensils; and the house was left to her. 
Lodges generally belong to the women, who gather the poles, erect them, 
and make the mats with which they are covered. 
If the children were very young when their father died, their uncles 
who had appropriated most of the property gave them presents, such as 
horses, when they were grown up, as though these represented part of their 
father's property and had been held in trust by the uncle until the children 
were of age. 
All the land and hunting-grounds were looked upon as tribal property, 
all parts of which were open to every member of the tribe. Of course, 
every band had its common recognized hunting, trapping, and fishing places; 
but members of any other bands were allowed to use them without restriction, 
whenever they desired. About seventy years ago the Fraser River bands 
north of Dog Creek, who had a different style of social organization, recog- 
nizing a nobility, clans, and societies, set up a claim to a large part of the 
northern hunting-grounds, which they attempted to parcel out as the sole 
property of certain of their clans or groups. For a time this caused much 
friction. The majority of the Lake and North Thompson bands were afraid 
of them, and avoided these grounds; but the people of the Lower Fraser 
River group would not acknowledge the claims, and hunted where they 
pleased. The northern people tried to make a compromise by allowing the 
southern band to hunt, but not to trap, in the disputed territory; but the 
latter ridiculed the proposal, and trapped where they liked. Afterwards, when 
the northern band saw that they could not enforce their claims, they gave 
up the attempt, and never tried it again. Fishing-places were also tribal property, including salmon-stations. Some- 
times men erected platforms, one above the other, quite close together along 
the riverbank. Any one could get in where there was room, and a place 
one man had this year, another might occupy next year. Often a number 
of men used the same station, taking turns at fishing. At the lakes every one had the privilege of trapping trout and erecting 
weirs. The fish caught in traps were distributed among all the families 
who came there. In most of these places it would have been useless to 
have more than one weir. On large streams where weirs were used, if salmon were not plentiful, 
all the people living on the stream fished with the people who had erected 
the weir lowest down. If salmon were plentiful, then generally the lower 
weirs were not built right across the stream, or, at least they were opened

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 573 
occasionally by the owners to allow fish to reach weirs erected by other 
families farther up the river. 
A deerfence was inheritable property, the nearest of kin inheriting it. 
If he did not care to use it, he gave it to the next of kin; and if none of 
them wanted it, then it was sold, generally for a small sum, to a stranger, 
who henceforth owned it. If a deerfence fell into disuse and was not 
repaired for a number of years, then any one might erect a new one and 
snare deer in that place. 
Eagle-cliffs were inheritable property, and were dealt with in the same 
way as deerfences. It was not uncommon in some places to infringe upon 
the property-rights in cagle-cliffs. 
Berry-patches were tribal property; but picking was under tribal control. 
All the large and valuable berrying-spots were looked after by the chief of 
the band in whose district they were situated. Thus there were several large serviceberry patches near Big Bar. The chief there watched the 
ripening of the berries, and deputed young men to watch and report on the 
various places. From time to time the watchman brought in branches and showed them to the chief. When the berries were about ripe, he sent 
out word that on a certain day the berrying would commence at a certain 
berry-patch. Women would come from as far away as Alkali Lake and 
Clinton. The first day each woman picked only a little, about enough for 
herself and her friends to eat fresh during that day and night. After the 
first day they picked all they could and began to cure them. When they 
had finished one patch, the chief directed them to the next one which was 
ripe, and so on until they had finished all. 
Root-digging grounds were all common tribal property. Some people 
of the Northern Fraser River bands laid a claim on the root-digging grounds 
of Quesnel Lake, where very large lily-roots grow, but their claims were not 
recognized by the rest of the tribe. 
Fat and meat were divided equally among the hunting-party by the 
leader or by the eldest hunter. A man hunting alone had the sole title to 
whatever game he killed; but when he brought the meat home, he almost always distributed a large part among his neighbors. Even meat of game 
trapped was generally distributed in like manner. Skins of animals trapped 
belonged to the person in whose trap they were caught, and skins of animals 
shot belonged to the hunting-party; but the hunting chief generally allowed 
the best hunters the greater part of the skins. 
Division of labor between the sexes was the same as among the Thompson 
tribe, although, it varied slightly in different families. Many men made most 
of their own clothes, and in several families only the men cooked fresh meat. 
At present the position of chiefs is the same as that found among the 
Thompson Indians. 
 

----

574 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
The four kinds of feasts celebrated by the Thompsoh Indians' were 
also held by the Shuswap, the first and third by far most frequently. In 
many bands the second (or nterxa'nk) feast was rarely celebrated, while the last one was fairly common; but no decorated kettle or painted sticks or 
stones were used in connection with it. Generally a common basket attached 
to a tump-line was used instead. Potlatches were formerly unknown, except among the bands next to the 
Carrier and Chilcotin. From these points the custom of giving potlatches 
spread farther cast and south, but never took a strong hold. Prior to 1850 
it was altogether confined to the Fraser River and Lake bands, and rare 
among the latter. From that date until about 1880 it spread among the 
Bonaparte and Kamloops divisions and the Upper Lillooet, Upper Thompson, 
and the Okanagon nearest to them. About 1885 it had reached its height, 
and thereafter waned rapidly among the Shuswap, and has now completely 
disappeared. In form the potlatch was identical with the one obtaining 
among the Upper Thompson. 
There was no begging custom, as among the Thompson tribe. If any 
one was short of food, his relatives were supposed to help him; and’ if they 
could not do so, it was the duty of the chief to make a quiet collection of 
food among those better off, and to give him the goods so collected in an 
unostentatious way, to avoid hurting his feelings. Sometimes the families 
best supplied with food were simply requested to give some of their stores 
to those in need. 
The Shuswap were great smokers. A few of both sexes, however, did 
not smoke. Simon Fraser, in 1808, said of them, “This tribe is extremely 
fond of smoking. ... They make use, in lieu of tobacco, of a kind of weed 
mixed with fat’¢ The weed referred to was the narrow-leaved tobacco 
(Nicotiana attenuata). After being gathered, it was cut up fine in a dish, 
and then spread on a large flat stone before the fire until quite dry. It was 
then thoroughly saturated with mountain-ram’s grease, mixed over, and rolled 
or rubbed with another flat stone for several hours. Instead of this it was 
sometimes put in a mortar and worked with a small stone pestle. It was 
then dried slightly and put away in bags made of a ram's scrotum, which 
were hung up in the lodge. Any person watching the process was entitled” 
to a free smoke of the tobacco. Kinnikinnic or bearberry leaves were seldom 
mixed with tobacco in smoking until after the introduction of the strong white 
man’s tohacco. Then the use of these admixtures became universal. Tradition 
relates that the first white man’s tobacco smoked by the Indians was some 
black twist given to them by Simon Fraser. It is said that it made many 
    
+ See Val. 1 of this series, pp. 206, 207. * Ibid, pp. 297-299. + bid, pp. 209, 300. « Fraser, in Masson, Les Bourgeois, etc, p. 162.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 575 
of them sick.’ In some places where tobacco was scarce, it was gathered 
under the surveillance of the chief, in order to give every person an equal 
chance. It grew luxuriantly on some village sites, and some Indians think 
the seeds must have been planted in these places. In later times the chief of cach Shuswap band received annually a present of tobacco from the 
Hudson Bay Company's post at Kamloops. The chiefs of distant bands sent 
young men to Kamloops to receive the annual present. Each chief was 
given a piece of twist-tobacco two fathoms long, and a message was sent 
with it to the effect that the chief receiving it must induce his people to 
trap diligently fur-bearing animals, that he must desist from wars, and always be friendly and helpful to the white employees of the company, who were 
travelling through the territory. Upon receiving the gift, the chief called all 
his men together, gave a feast in which all smoked and talked for from two 
to four days, and then he divided the remaining tobacco equally among all 
present. The Shuswap had all the smoking-rites found among the Thompson 
tribe, and all their councils and many feasts began with smoking-ceremonies. 
The pipes used were of the same kinds as those of the Thompson Indians, and almost all of them were made of varieties of soapstone. A few pipes, 
however, were made of buck-antler and of bearberryroot? About four 
generations ago the most-common kind of pipe was tubular.® shaped like a 
cigar-holder. Such pipes were well adapted for the native tobacco; but after 
the introduction of twist-tobacco, which was smoked with kinnikinnic, pipes 
with upright bowls entirely displaced them. Pipes were sometimes carved. 
At the present day wooden pipes, bought from the whites, are almost 
altogéther used. Drums were used at dances and as an accompaniment to singing. They 
were all circular, and exactly like those of the Thompson tribe. They were 
very seldom painted or decorated in any way. Fawn's hoofs were sometimes 
attached all around the rim. 
OrcawizaTION OF THE WESTERN PART oF TE TRIBE. — As stated before, 
the organization of the Cafion division, and of all the bands of the Fraser 
River division north of Dog Creek, was based on the system obtaining 
among the Carrier and Chilcotin. By 1850 the Lake division had also 
adopted this system in nearly all its details, and the Dog Creck band was 
very much influenced by it. At the same date the Pavilion band had 
adopted several features of a similar system prevailing among the Lillooet, 
and the High Bar band was beginning to be influenced by it also. The 
Indians state explicitly that these customs were introduced through the Cafion 
  
+ Seep agg. 5 See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 306, p. 382, which represents the mos common type of Shuswap pipe. Others resembled Figs. 307 and 309 (p- 383) and Figs. 271 and 273 (p. 301) * id, Fig. 374, p. 420.

----

576 TEIT, THF. SHUSWAP. 
division, who had obtained them from the Chilcotin, and through the Soda 
Creek band, who had adopted them from the Carrier; and in these bands 
the system had its firmest hold. 
Rank. — The people of these bands were divided into three classes, — 
noblemen, common people, and slaves. The first class were called “chiefs,” 
‘chiefs’ offspring,” or ‘chiefs’ descendants,’ and constituted in various bands 
from nearly one-half to over two-thirds of the whole population. In most 
bands there were few slaves; some of them the property of the nobility, and 
some that of the common people. The nobles had special privileges, and 
generally married within their class. Nobility was hereditary, and seems to 
have descended in both the male and the female line. Women of this class 
appear to have been on an equality with the men, and had in all respects the same rights and privileges. Hereditary chiefs of the bands always 
belonged to the nobility, but it seems that they tended to become rather 
chiefs of clans than of bands. 
Crest Groups. — The nobles appear to have been divided into hered- 
itary groups, which probably differed somewhat from those occurring among the Lillooet; for it is asserted that there were no traditions relating to the 
origin of village communities. bands or groups of people. In other words, 
there were no clan traditions relating to the origin of any of these groups. 
It would seem that the originators of the clans obtained a “crost” through an 
initiation which followed a short period of fasting and training, in a manner 
similar to novices of religious societies. These groups of the nobility were 
strictly hereditary. A person marrying a member of the crest group did not 
acquire its privileges, although they belonged to his children, both male and 
female. Marriage seems to have been exogamic in these groups. The 
existence of rank classes and of crest groups probably had tended to increase 
the number of marriages with Carrier and Chilcotin, and in time would have 
made the western Shuswap very distinct from the rest of the tribe. The 
crest of the group was carved and painted on the top of the ladder of the 
underground house, the ladder frequently being made very long for this 
purpose. Sometimes the figure was carved out of a block and fastened to 
the top of the ladder. The people dwelling in the house were supposed to 
stand in some kind of relation to the crest, perhaps to be simply under its 
protection. 
Among the Cafion division, representations of the crest were also erected 
at the main fishing-places of the family group, and also at their graves. At the bridge across the Chilcotin Cafion there were three carved figures, — 
one at the south end, and two at the north end, — which were supposed 
to represent the crests of the three chiefs, or rather family groups, that 
owned the bridge. From this it appears that there were at least two groups 
in the North Cafion band. Each crest group of the noblemen had an hered-

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 577 
itary chief or leader. The crests among the nobility, so far as 1 could 
ascertain, appear to have been (1) Grisly Bear, (2) Raven, (3) Wolf, (4) 
Eagle, (5) Beaver. 
It appears that the members of a man's crest group, as well as his 
relatives, were bound to avenge his death. It is not clear that the societies. 
to be described presently were bound to avenge the death of a member. 
On the whole, it seems they were not. 
Grouping of Common People’ — 
Most of the groups into which the common people were divided were not 
strictly hereditary. Any man could become a member of any one of these 
groups by passing through a short training and fasting a few days in the 
woods, and an initiation in which he had to dress and act like the protector 
of the group that he had chosen to enter. However, a son generally 
became a member of the group to which his father belonged, in preference 
to others. Membership in some of these groups, as in that of the Black 
Bear, which it appears admitted members only from among the common 
people, was more strictly hereditary. Each of these groups had a protector, 
and a clew to their nature may be obtained from a list of these as far as 
remembered: (1) Black Bear; (2) Moose; (3) Caribou; (4) Elk; (5) Deer; 
(6) Sheep or Goat; (7) Beaver; (8) Marmot; (g) Mink, Weasel, or Marten 
(not sure which); (10) Hare; (11) Buffalo; (12) Wolf or Dog; (13) Owl; 
(14) Ruffed Grouse; (15) Ptarmigan (3); (16) Prairie Chicken; (17) Goose; 
(18) Thunder-Bird; (19) Salmon; (20) Frog; (21) Service-Berry; (22) Cannibal ; 
(23) Corpse; (24) Wind; (25) Rain; (26) Rock-Slide (or Avalanche); (27) 
Arrow; (28) Snow (or Snowshoe); (29) Hunger or Famine. 
Some of these groups were closely related; as, for instance, the Wolf 
or Dog, the Cannibal, and the Corpse (Nos. 12, 22, and 23), which seem 
to have formed parts of a larger unit; so that a member of onc had the 
right to perform the dances and sing the songs of the others. Another 
larger unit embraced the Beaver, ThunderBird, Frog, Wind, Rain, and 
Arrow (Nos. 7, 18, 20, 24, 25, and 27). Moose, Caribou, Elk, Deer, and 
probably also Buffalo (Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, and 11) may have formed another 
unit. The Moose, Caribou, Elk, Deer, and Snow were particularly groups 
belonging to hunters; while the Wolf, Cannibal, etc., appear to have been 
more shamanistic in their nature. The Service-Berry (No. 21) was probably 
altogether a group of women. It seems that these groups intercrossed the 
hereditary family groups of the nobility; so that common people, and perhaps 
also members of the nobility of any crest group, may have belonged to any 
of the groups here discussed. It would seem, therefore, that these are 
analogous to the dancing societies of the east and west. 
Certain kinds of ceremonial dresses and ornaments were used by the   
Compare the honorific totem described by Father Morice (Notes on the Western Dénds, pp. 203 205).

----

578 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
crest groups and dancing societies when giving dances and potlatches, the 
members of one society having no right to use the paraphernalia of another. 
Each society had a distinct song and dance peculiar to itself. Most dances 
were performed in the wintertime only, but some could take place at any 
season. The only masks remembered are one representing a beaver, used 
by the group comprising the Beaver Society; and another representing a 
corpse, used by members of the group comprising the Corpse and Cannibal 
Societies. Rattles made of wood and bark enclosing pebbles were very 
commonly used in dances. 
A few of the dances were described to me in detail. 
Although these descriptions are vague, they give us some 
conception of the activities of these societies. 
In the Marmot dance (No. 8) the chief actor appeared 
carrying a pack and the sticks used for marmot-traps, as 
if he were going on a trip to the mountains to trap 
marmots. Another man imitated the action of the marmots 
by motions and by whistling, and the dance finished with his capture by the trapper. The song to this dance 
was very peculiar. In the Hunger or Famine dance (No. 20) the chief 
actor appeared almost naked, and painted like a skeleton, 
to represent the famine. White stripes ran down the 
legs, arms, and backbone, across the shoulders, and along 
the ribs (Fig. 250). These marks represented bones. 
He had his face painted with circles around the eyes, 
and with dots or marks on the brow, cheeks, and chin. 
He had white paint or down on his head, and a long 
white streak across his mouth. Sometimes he wore a 
mask with hollow cheeks, protruding eyes, and projecting 
Fig 250. Body Puning jaws and teeth. He personified hunger, which is one of 
representing the Famine: pe figures of Shuswap mythology. The Chilcotin had 
  the same dance. Some men who were said to belong to the Salmon (No. 19) used to 
act in a dance the catching of salmon with dip-nets, spears, etc., meanwhile 
singing the Salmon Song. Women danced with baskets and branches of service-berry bushes (No. 
21), imitating the gathering of berries. The Carrier had both the Salmon 
dance and the Service-Berry dance. 
Others impersonated moose, caribou, elk, and deer (Nos. 2-5). The 
persons acting dressed in the skins of these animals, with the scalp part 
hanging over their head and face. Some had antlers attached to the head . and neck. Others assisted in the acting. The dancers went through all the

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 579 
actions of the animal impersonated, imitating its feeding and fighting, hunting 
and snaring, chasing over lakes in canoes, -and final capture or death.! 
The dances of the Prairie Chicken (No. 16) and Ruffed Grouse (No. 14) 
were performed by both men and women, the dancers imitating the cries 
and all the actions of these birds. Each dance had a song of its own. The 
castern Shuswap and Thompson Indians adopted the Prairie Chicken dance and song; and their women sometimes danced it at potlatches for amusement, 
the dancers being paid. 
Another dance (No. 28), in which much swan's down was scattered about, — perhaps in imitation of snow, — was performed chiefly by hunters, 
who dressed as if they were travelling on snowshoes in cold weather. They 
danced in a circle, carrying their bows and arrows, and sang the Snow Song. 
The performers in the Beaver dance (No. 7) wore masks of bark and 
head-bands of beaver-skin, having a beaver-tail in front and a number of 
tall feathers all around. The mask was painted with vertical red stripes. 
In other dances, called the Thunder (No. 18), Wind (No. 24), Rain (No. 23), 
Arrow (No. 27), and Frog (No. 20) dances, the performers wore head-bands 
of beaverskin, without the tail. They uscd no masks, but had their faces 
painted in different ways. In one or two of these dances, arrows with very 
large stone heads were used, and the bows were covered with dentalium- 
shells. Feathers and scalps of red-headed woodpeckers were attached to the 
body and hair. In a few dances necklaces and belts of cedar or other bark 
dyed red were used by the dancers, while others wore necklaces of dentalia. 
Short bark whistles were sometimes used, and strings of fawn’s hoofs were 
often worn around the ankles, knees, waist, wrists, elbows, and neck. 
Among all the Shuswap bands of Fraser River, as far south as Alkali 
Lake or Dog Creek, were men who danced the Dog dance (No. 12). They 
formed a group by themselves, called the Tsgka'ma, which name was also 
applied to their dances. The song of their dances was called the Tseka'ma 
Song. These people were also called Dogs, Crazy Dogs, Dog-Dancers, and 
Wolves. Their dance was sometimes called the Dog dance, or the Crazy 
dance, and their dance-song the Dog Song or Wolf Song. Their dance was 
generally opened by one man clad in wolfskins, who sang the song and 
danced in a circle in the midst of the people; a chorus of the Dog Society, 
who were seated on a platform, joining in the song, and accompanying it 
  
} An old man told me that the members of the Moose, Caribou, Elk, Deer and Buflslo groups were the only ones who in their dances imitated the rutting of these animals. The people accustomed to these dances took these actions as a matter of course; but to bands of Shuswap unaccustomed to them they caused some, especially the young women, to be ashamed while some of the men thought this kind of pantomime was grest amusement. An old Inditn of Spences Bridge told me that he had scen one of these dances performed by a band of Williams Lake Indians who had come (0 the Thompson shove Spences Bridge to bay fish, and who wintered there. The Thompson people were astonished. at the successful imitation of the animals. They asked the Shuswap to perform the dance again, leaving out the representation of sexual acts in the rattng:season, a it made thei women ashamed. The Shuswap repeated. the dance later on, leaving out part of it, as directed.   
  
     

----

580 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
with drums, beating of sticks, and shaking of rattles. The dancer soon 
became very excited, shook his head from side to side, and cried and acted 
like a dog or wolf. At last he became like a madman, and acted violently, hitting and scratching the spectators, throwing water on them, and breaking everything within reach. When he was at the height of his fury, another 
man dressed in wolfskins appeared, leading a dog, and he also danced. 
Then the first dancer attacked the dog, tore it in pieces, and devoured it. Then the second dancer became excited, and joined the first one in devouring 
the dog. The chorus took up the excitement, and, leaving their places, the members danced behind the actors, each with a wolfscalp on his head, the 
rest of the skin and tail hanging down behind. They flourished their batons, 
shook their rattles, and beat their drums fiercely, singing at the tops of their 
voices. Finally the spectators were drawn in, and joined in the dance, clapping their hands violently, and singing loudly. After a while the dance 
ceased and the singing subsided through sheer exhaustion. Meanwhile the 
Tseka'ma all disappeared. Anything broken or destroyed during the perform- 
ance had to be paid for by the peaple giving the dance. 
Sometimes the Tseka'ma danced the Dog dance differently. The people sat in a circle, leaving a large open space in the middle. The singers sat 
at one end, and commenced the Dog Song in a low key. Two quarters of 
raw venison were buried under the floor of the lodge, — one at one end, 
and another at the opposite end. Soon after the singing commenced, a man 
with a wolfskin on his head appeared, leading another man dressed in skins, 
who represented a dog or wolf. The man began to sing, and led the supposed dog round the circle several times. The man acting like the dog became 
very fierce, and snapped at the people, sometimes biting them. His excitement 
increased, he took the scent of the venison, and finally located one of the 
quarters, which he dug up with his hands in the manner of a dog. He dragged it away and devoured it, attacking and biting any people who came 
near him. When he had finished. he looked very fierce, his face and hands 
being covered with blood. In his eagerness to attack and bite the people, 
he dragged the man around who was holding him. At last he found the 
other quarter of venison; and when he was devouring it, he was at the 
height of his frenzy. Then a number of women danced opposite him, singing 
the Dog or Wolf Song. Gradually he calmed down, and after a couple of 
hours he acted again like a sane person. He was then surrounded by his 
friends, who kept him in their midst as they danced, and he disappeared 
with them amid much shouting and clapping of hands. The Carrier of 
Fraser River, and the Chilcotin, had these same dances. Some Tseka'ma, often called Cannibals (No. 22), had a dance sometimes 
called Corpse or Ghost dance (No. 23). They were supposed to have great 
power over the dead, and trained themselves in graveyards. In the perform. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 581 
ance a man was introduced, wearing a mask of white birch-bark (or of 
wood painted white) painted black at the eyebrows and mouth, and with 
shaggy black hair, which hung down over the face. After dancing a while, he vomited blood and fell down, apparently dead. The men formed a circle 
around him and sang the Cannibal or Corpse Song, while the women formed 
another circle on the outside. They danced in circles round him, the women 
moving in a direction opposite to that of the men. When the dance was at 
its height, the dancer revived and arose. 
Another Tseka'ma dance, sometimes called the Graveyard dance, was 
performed when people erected large carved monuments at graves. In later 
days it was performed when people conveyed heavy logs to graveyards, which 
were to be used for the bottom logs or sills of fences. A large tree was 
felled and cut off ten or more axehandles in length, and hewed to a 
diameter of about 45 cm. square. If the ponies could not haul it, then this 
dance was performed to give the people strength to carry it. The Dog 
dance and song were used, which excited the people, and gave them extraor- 
dinary strength . for the time being. Drums were brought, the people sang, 
and soon they snatched up the log and marched away with it. Before long 
the excitement increased, and they danced with the log, sometimes raising it 
above them. Some men, generally from one to four in number, would leap 
on top of the log and dance on it, or run back and forth on it, as it was 
carried along. The log was conveyed to the houses first, where other people 
generally joined the dancers; and then it was carried to the graveyard, 
where it was deposited, and where the dance stopped. This dance was 
always performed at night, and it is not many years since it went out of 
use among the Alkali Lake and Canim Lake bands. 
It seems certain that the whole system outlined above was originally 
foreign to the Shuswap tribe, and has been introduced from the Carrier, 
Chilcotin, and Lillooet tribes, who themselves have borrowed these customs 
from their neighbors of the coast, — the Carrier chiefly from the Tsimshian, 
the Chilcotin mainly from the Bella Coola, and the Lillooet principally from 
the Squamish. The system as adopted by the Shuswap shows diverse 
elements, and seems to have reached them first about the beginning of the 
last century, gradually spreading from the Soda Creck band and the Calon 
division, and at a later date from the Pavilion band, until by 1855 or there- 
abouts it had embraced almost all the western Shuswap. Although the method of dividing the people into three classes originated at an earlier date 
than the crest groups and societies, still 1 think there is no doubt of its 
being derived from the same sources. Probably the original families of cach 
band, perhaps only the chief and relatives, became the nobility; while all 
accessions to the band were classed as common people, without any rights 
to land or fisheries. Owing to the comparatively recent introduction of the

----

582 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
whole system in most bands, the decimation of the people by small-pox in 
the sixties, and the introduction at the same time of a new social system 
through the settlement of the country by the whites and the arrival of 
missionaries, these customs soon dropped out of use, and at the present day 
very little is remembered about them. In fact, the information is now so 
meagre that it is very difficult to draw exact conclusions regarding the real 
status, privileges, and ceremonies of any of the various classes, crest groups, 
and societies, some informants having very vague ideas regarding the differences 
between these groups. 
Chiefs. — It is difficult to state whether the chiefs were heads of bands 
or leaders of crest groups. It seems probable that each crest group had a 
chief, and not each band. In some places both may have existed. Chiefs 
were hereditary, as among the rest of the tribe. 
Among some of the western Shuswap, women occasionally became chiefs 
of bands, when there were no male heirs to fill the position. Then the 
woman's son became the next following chief. 
Slaves. — The children of a slave woman, if their father was noble, 
became noble also; and children of a noble woman by a slave father were 
also noble from birth, but instances of slave men becoming husbands of noble women were exceedingly rare. One or two instances, however, are on record. 
Names. — Names were the same as among other Shuswap, and also 
belonged to families. Some people, at least, had additional names, which 
belonged to the crest group; and some of these are asserted to have been 
of Chilcotin origin. At dances the performers were for the time being called 
by the same name as their crest or the animal they represented; and at 
potlatches the group donating and the group receiving were both called by 
their crests, collectively and individually. Personal property was divided among the members of the deceased's 
crest group, the relatives receiving the largest share. If a person left only 
a little property, it was divided among the relatives only. Personal ownership 
in land did not exist. Fishing-sites belonged to the crest group. All land 
and whatever grew upon it, all hunting-grounds with the game thereon, and 
all rivers and lakes with the fish therein, belonged to the nobility; and 
among the Cadon division all trading-privileges also belonged to this class. 
The land, with the waters pertaining thereto, was divided among the various 
bands, although their hunting-grounds were not in all cases well defined. 
The hunting-territory, root-digging grounds. berrying-resorts, and camping- 
places in the mountains of each band belonged to the nobility of the band 
in common, but the trapping-grounds and fishing-places were divided among the 
crest groups of the nobility of each band. Apparently some of the principal village sites were also divided among them; or, at least in some instances, 
the land was divided so that each crest group had its habitations and

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 583 
graveyards on its own grounds. In other cases it appears that members of 
different crest groups dwelt in the same village, and buried in the same 
graveyard, but members of different crest groups did not live in the same house. 
Chiefs or members of noble crest groups collected rents from common people and strangers for the privilege of fishing and trapping on their grounds. 
In cases where they trapped or fished without permission, they were fined 
or driven off. Tolls were also collected on bridges by the crest groups that had erected them. In a great many places, however, the more distant 
hunting-grounds and root-digging and berrying places were looked upon as tribal property; and the nobility of the bands cither did not claim them, or, being unable to enforce their claim, had decided to leave them as common property. Tithes or rents were generally paid in skins, dried fish, and oil. Potlatches. — Potlatches were very common among the western Shuswap, especially among the Cafion division, where they were often on a very large scale. They were the same, or almost the same, as those customary recently among the Thompson tribe, and were generally given by one crest group to another. Many were given by Shuswap to Chilcotin and Carrier, and vice versé. The crest group giving the potlatch erected a large lodge for the purpose, and exhibited a large carved image of their crest in front of or on the top of the lodge. The guests, on their arrival, made an offering or 
present of many articles to it, which were appropriated by their hosts. Any guest or stranger present who mentioned the name of the crest publicly during any day of the potlatch had to make a present of something valuable to it. Just after the giving-away of each article a special short song was sung by a chorus of members of the party potlatching, which was taken up by a chorus of the party receiving the presents, and joined in by most of the people assembled. It was accompanied with loud beating of drums and shaking of rattles. This song was only sung when gifts were exchanged. Another special song was sung when the people were about to be feasted. It was commenced as soon as the waiters were seen carrying in the food. 
The party receiving gifts had to return them in equal or slightly increased value at a future date. *

----

XI. — BIRTH, CHILDHOOD, PUBERTY, MARRIACE, DEATH. 
Precxaxcy. — The restrictions on a pregnant woman and her husband 
were not so many as among the Thompson Indians. A pregnant woman 
was not allowed to sleep long; both she and her husband had to rise early. 
She had to work steadily, especially at light work, and must not sit down 
too often or too long. She should walk around frequently, but not to make 
herself too tired. She should avoid running and jumping, and ought not to 
lift or carry very heavy burdens. She should feel moderately tired every 
night. She and her husband must bathe often. She must not touch nor 
look at black bear, nor pass near a bear which has been killed. She must 
not eat any fresh flesh of bird, mammal, or fish (excepting salmon), until at 
least a day old. She should eat often and a little at a time. She ought to 
drink plenty of clear running water morning and evening. 
Bieri. — Midwives were in demand at childbirth, and were paid a 
dressed deerskin for their services. Wealthy people paid them a horse. If a child does not breathe when born, the midwife blows in its ears and on 
the top of its head to revive it. Shortly afer birth, the midwife inscrts her 
finger in the child's mouth to give it the proper form, and presses against 
the palate to shove out the nose. Then she pulls and pinches the latter 
and massages the face, so that all the features may become shapely in after 
years. The navelstring is cut with an ordinary sharp knife. In former days 
midwives used thin arrow-stone knives for this purpose. The navelstring was 
tied with a soft thread of Indian-hemp bark. The piece outside the ligature 
was preserved by some people and sewed in a little pouch, which was 
attached to the head of the cradle or worn around the neck. This custom 
was evidently borrowed from eastern tribes. Some people, especially of the 
western bands, did not preserve it. The infant was bathed in warm water 
shortly after birth, and afterwards in tepid water once a day, by most people, 
until able to walk. The afterbirth was always hung up in a tree. A 
woman, after parturition, drank a decoction of mountain-juniper for several 
days. Some drank instead a decoction of devil's club. Abortion was rarely 
practised. It was effected by drinking decoctions of certain herbs. The day 
after the birth of a child the father gave a feast to all the neighbors. 
Cripioop. — The most common carriers were made of birch-bark in 
the manner of those of the Upper Lillooet and Thompson Indians. Among 
the western bands this was the only kind used. The rims of all cradles 
[584] 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 585 
were strengthened with a hoop of willow around the outside, and some had 
a hoop on the inside as well. The raised hoop across the head of the carrier 
was also made of willow, but maple and other woods were sometimes used. 
An extra piece of thick bark was sewed to the carrier on the inside near 
the head. Most cradles were entirely covered with buckskin, usually dyed 
red. which was sewed on to the bark. The covering was wider than the 
carrier, and a flap was left free on each side, extending nearly the full length, 
and the two flaps folding together over the top of the infant were laced 
together with strings. Conduits were not used for cradles by all people. 
A good many, however, used them for male children, but very seldom for 
female children. All were made of birch-bark, generally with a padding of 
buckskin at the end next the infant. They are seldom used nowadays. The 
inside of the carrier, at the foot, was padded with rabbit-skins, which were 
considered best and softest for the child's feet. The padding for the body 
was made of lynx i 
skin; and the head MI 
padding, or pillow, of 
musquash-skins. The 
child was wrapped in 
a small soft lynx-skin 
robe, and the covering 
over the top of the 
cradle was generally 
composed of some 
dressed marmotskins if sewed together. Many . 
people of the Shuswap 
Lake, Kamloops, and North Thompson divisions, used board carriers similar 
to some of the styles in vogue among the Upper Thompson tribe and the 
Okanagon. On the North Thompson and among some other bands they 
were more common than those made of birch-bark. A few people of the 
Bonaparte and Lake divisions also used them. The most common kind had 
a round, wide head, and slits in the sides (Fig. 251);" but they were rarely 
provided with projecting head-pieces. When a board could not be obtained 
easily, they were made of rods woven together with bark twine (Fig. 251, 
9. Two or three slightly different shapes were used. Most of them were 
covered with dressed skin, generally dyed red or yellow, the flaps of which 
were brought together in front and laced over the infant. At the present 
day board carriers are very seldom used. 
Buckskin sacks laced in front were also used for carrying infants, with   
  
    
    
                  
s « a Fig. 251. Cradle-Boards. 
  
+ See Vol. 1 of tis series, Fig. 381, , p. 307.

----

586 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
or without the board carrier. Carriers for twins were often made of rawhide. 
Carrier sacks were sometimes fitted with conduits. When dressed skin was 
scarce, cradles of birch-bark and board were not covered. The sack containing the child was attached to the board by means of a belt, which passed 
through loops on the sides; ? or a small piece of buckskin was sewed across 
the inside of the board (near the middle) or around the outside or back of 
the board, the ends of which were brought together and laced in front. A 
new cradle and a new sack or robe were made for each child. The old 
cradles were thrown away or suspended on trees. 
Heads of children were never pressed or deformed in any way. The 
custom of fostering children was practised to some extent. The ordeal of 
whipping, exactly as among the Thompson tribe, was universal 
Twins. — Twins were considered great “mystery.” and the regulations 
regarding them were much the same as among the Thompson Indians. The 
woman's husband was the real father of twins; but the fetus was divided, or became two creations, through the influence of the black bear, grisly 
bear, or deer. The mother was frequently visited by one of these animals 
in her dreams. or she repeatedly dreamed of their young, and thus she had 
twins. Whichever animal she dreamed about became the protector for life, 
the manitou, of her children. A woman was considered lucky to have twins, 
for she thus gained powerful manitous for her children before their birth. 
Twins who had the deer for protector were always successful in hunting; 
and, in like manner, those who had the grisly bear for protector could always 
find bears and kill them easily. The bear never became angry nor tried to 
hurt them. Most twins were under the protection of the black bear. A 
good many had the grisly bear for protector, and a lesser number the deer. So 
strong was the influence of the black bear believed to be, that a twin having 
that as a protector was thought to know at once when a black bear was killed, and immediately uttered cries like that animal. On the birth of twins, 
the parents shifted camp to the woods, some distance away from other 
people, even if it were mid-winter. Twins were not carried around so much 
as other children, onc of the parents generally remaining at home with them. 
However, when it was necessary to transport them, carriers of black bear, 
grisly, or deer hide, were used, according to the animal which was their 
protector. If ihe right kind of hide could not be obtained, birch-bark cradles 
were used. Twins were not allowed near people for four years. During 
this time the father washed them with fir-branches every day. If the father 
happened to die, the mother washed them. Young men were not engaged 
for the purpose, at least among the western Shuswap. 
Twins were believed to be endowed with powers over the elements, 
  
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 281, 4, p. 307. + 1bid, pp. 307 and 308.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 587 
especially over rain and snow. If a twin bathed in a lake or stream, it would rain. Their ordinary method of washing was by dipping fir-branches 
in a basket full of water, and by pouring the water over themselves with 
a dipper. The next child born after twins was also considered “mystery,” for some 
of the influences which controlled the twins still remained in the womb of 
the mother. For this reason the next child was kept apart and washed with 
fir-branches, in the manner of twins, for one year or less. During this time 
the family lived in a conical lodge made of fir-branches. 
Puserry. — When a girl had her first menses, she was considered 
‘mystery,’ and had to live in a small lodge apart from the people. The 
lodge was conical in shape, and made of fir-branches placed very thickly 
together, or of mats. Her grandmother, mother, or aunt attended to her. 
For the first four days she had to fast; and afterwards for one year she 
trained herself in the same manner as pubescent girls of the Thompson tribe." 
She remained in her lodge all day, engaged in practising the various arts 
and industries required of her in future years, her parent or attendant instructing 
her. In this way she made many miniature bags, mats, and baskets of 
different kinds; did sewing and embroidery: manufactured thread, twine, 
ete; and, in fact, made a beginning at almost all kinds of woman's work, 
so that she might be fitted to fill a useful place in the family, and become 
a valuable wife. Everything she made was hung up in trees near her lodge, 
alongside a frequented trail, or at the crossing of two trails. She wandered 
abroad at dusk, and spent every night in the mountains roaming about, 
exercising herself and praying. About daybreak she bathed in running water, 
washing herself with fir-branches; and praying to the Day Dawn. She had 
to be back in her lodge before it was properly daylight. If she had wandered far and daylight overtook her, so that she might possibly meet people on 
her way home, she made a veil of fir-branches to hide herself; for no one, 
excepting her instructor or nearest relatives, was supposed to see her face 
during her training. Sometimes her male relatives never saw her during the 
whole time. After arriving at the lodge, her mother or attendant gave her 
some breakfast, after which she had a rest. She was not allowed to slecp 
much, and as a rule was not allowed to keep supplies of food in her lodge, 
for fear that she might over-eat. Some girls went out in the evening, and 
again in the carly morning, while the greater part of the night they spent 
in the lodge sleeping. While out at night, girls practised running, climbing, 
carrying burdens, digging trenches, the last so that in after years they 
might be expert at rootdigging. Each morning they brought home a small 
load of fresh fir-brush or fire-wood to their lodge. A pubescent girl, during 
  
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 311316.

----

588 TEIT, THE. SHUSWAP. 
her training, wore a large robe, which was painted red on the breast and 
sides, and her hair was done up in a knot at cach ear. It seems that among 
the North Thompson and Bonaparte people some girls painted their faces 
all red, and sometimes part of their bodies as well. Some of the Kamloops girls painted only their cheeks. Girls of the western bands, and a great 
many throughout the other divisions, did not paint the face at all. 
The girl wore a head-band made from the inside bark of the willows 
but in some places cedar-bark was used instead, the material, when not at 
hand, being procured from the North Thompson and Lillooet people. She 
was provided with a wooden comb, a bark wiper, a scratcher, a drinking-tube 
and whistle of bone, all of which she wore attached to a thong around her 
neck. Some girls wore the comb stuck in one knot of the hair, and the 
scratcher in the other. Some scratchers were two-pronged and made of 
wood. The girl also carried a small birch-bark basket provided with a 
thong for carrying it, and often having a handle of wood besides. To the 
rim of the basket were attached many buckskin thongs, on which dentalium- 
shells were threaded. Inside her lodge she suspended grass, bark, rushes, 
and other materials that she had gathered for the making of miniatures; 
strings for threading seeds on, that she might become an adept at stringing 
roots; fir-branches, from which she plucked the needles in her spare time, 
that she might learn to move her fingers nimbly; and pieces of skin, on 
which she practised tanning and dressing. 
Girls placed little heaps of dry firneedles on their wrists and arms, to 
which they set fire, meanwhile praying that they might be enabled to withstand 
pain of all kinds, but especially that of child-birth. They generally burned 
themselves in from two to four places, — as a rule, on both wrists and on 
the fore-part of each arm. Many families watched their girls from childhood 
until marriage. It seems, however, that in most bands there was very little 
immorality among young people before the coming of the whites. Lads commenced their training when the voice changed, or when they 
commenced to dream of women, arrows, and canoes. Most boys did not 
live apart from the people, but separated themselves at irregular intervals, 
extending from two or three days to upwards of as many weeks at a time. 
During their absence they trained themselves with the object of obtaining a 
manitou and of acquiring the requisite knowledge for the profession they had 
chosen, such as that of the gambler, shaman, warrior, hunter, etc. Their 
training continued until they had accomplished their object, — from one to 
upwards of eight or ten years. During their first period of seclusion they 
fasted as long as they could, generally from four to ten days. Some lads, 
especially among the western bands, built their sweat-houses in some wild or 
  
+ These were the same as those of the Thompson Indians (see vol. of this series, Figs. 282285, pp. 312—314).

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 589 
lonely spot near their home, to which they repaired almost every evening, 
and after sweating and training during the night they returned home after 
daylight. Among the Dog Creek band a noted place for youths dancing 
and praying was in a large cave in the clifis on the north side of the creek, 
a little above the present Dog Creek village. 
Twins did not train to acquire manitous, as they had them already. It 
seems that sweathouses had no special doors, nor were they erected in 
reference to the four quarters or to sunrise. Young men supplicated the 
Day Dawn, but some also prayed occasionally to the Earth, the Sun, and 
the Darkness (or Night). Among the western bands many addressed themselves 
directly to animals, birds, weapons, and other material objects, and rarely 
supplicated the Day Dawn, ete. A young man, when training, wore a painted robe and a head-band of 
willow-bark, elwagnus-bark, or cedarbark. Some of the last were bought 
ready-made from the Lillooet and Chilcotin. Many lads in some bands wore 
no headbands; and the face was not painted, excepting occasionally among 
the southern bands. Every night, or during the day, part of the time was 
spent in running, jumping, and in many kinds of gymnastics, and at shooting with arrows. The hollow cnd of a deer's or elk's bone was shot at, as 
among the Thompson Indians, and lads ran down mountain-sides trying to 
keep up with bowlders they had started from the top. They also climbed 
mountains in the cvening, trying to overtake the ascending shadow as the 
sun set. The largest feathers of all birds killed by a lad during training were 
plucked out and hung up near his sweat-house, or suspended from trees near a 
trail. Fir-branches at washing-places were piled up in the same way as among 
the Thompson people. Scratchers, drinking-tubes, and combs like those of 
the girls were used. Lads purged themselves by drinking decoctions of 
soapberry-bush, barberry-bush, and other medicines, and also made themselves 
vomit by running willow-twigs down their throats. They tied long fir-branches 
to their fect, or made rough snowshoes of firbranches and ran in shallow 
water with them on, praying to the Day Dawn that in after years their limbs 
might be strong and tireless when they walked on snowshoes, and that their 
shoes might not sink deep into the snow. A lad training did not cat fat; 
for it would make him heavy, make it difficult to vomit, and stop him from 
dreaming. He did not eat any fresh fish, excepting the tailpart. He ate 
marrow from old bones to make himself strong and fleet of foot. He also 
rubbed all over his body a white fungus which grows on trees, to give it 
strength and suppleness. Almost all the lads of the tribe cut their bodies 
at some time during their period of training. This formed an important 
part of the training of warriors, hunters, and runners. 
I may here state, that although almost every man of the tribe was both

----

590 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
a hunter and a fisherman, still there were certain men who trained with the 
special object of being hunters; and these men excelled, or were thought to 
excel, others. The novice ran until quite hot, and then cut the points of his eight 
fingers with a sharp arrow-stone, after which he sweatbathed. Others usually 
cut four halfcircles or four straight lines, not very deep, on the outside of 
cach leg, between the ankle and the knee, with a stone knife or dagger, 
afterwards piercing the inside of each leg in four places between the ankle 
and the knee with the point of a dagger, or, instead, cutting four dotlike cuts 
or four crosses: He made these cuts in very cold, clear water, and afterwards 
sweat-bathed. Meanwhile he prayed that he might be enabled to withstand 
pain stoically and without fear, and that, if wounded, his wounds might 
heal quickly. The cutting of the fingertips was supposed to let out all bad blood. Besides the above, lads training to be warriors slashed their sides 
and breast, — generally four cuts on each side, and from four to eight on 
the breast. Those training to be gamblers also cut the point of their tongue, 
and some of them swallowed the blood. This was supposed to make them lucky. 
Both girls and boys were carefully watched from childhood, and not 
allowed to smoke or have sexual connection until after their periods of 
training. To indulge in the latter during their training would have a 
disastrous effect on their future, would render of no avail the training they had undergone, and would make it impossible to obtain a manitou or become 
proficient in “mystery” for a very long time. It would also make them heavy- 
footed, slow, and short-winded in after years. The majority of both boys and girls wore strings of dew-claws of 
fawns on some part of their persons during their training, most commonly 
around the knees or ankles. Some carried bunches of them in their hands, 
and used them as rattles when passing any awe-inspiring or uncanny places 
in the mountains. Among the western and perhaps other bands, fires were not lighted on 
mountaintops by boys and girls. Both boys and girls gathered lice, which they enclosed in a horse-tail 
reed, and set adrift on a stream, at the same time praying to the Day Dawn 
that in after years they juight have no lice. This was done on four consec- 
utive mornings. All pubescent lads and some girls made pictures with paint on rocks 
during the middle or toward the end of their training-period. Most of these 
pictures were representations of objects seen in their dreams, and the painting 
of them was supposed to hasten the attainment of a person's manitou or 
other desires (Fig. 252). 
Marwiace Custoxs. — The marriage-customs require no extended notice, 
as they were just the same as those in vogue among the Thompson

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 591 
Indians! Marriage by presents and marriage by betrothal were the most 
common and more honorable methods. Marriage by claiming or touching 
during the religious or ghost dance was also in vogue. As a rule, the 
woman took up her abode among her husband's people; but a compromise 
existed, as shown by the conducting-ceremonies, which were exactly the same 
as among the Thompson tribe! As among the latter, blood-relations did not 
mary, not even second-cousins. There were no other restrictions, excepting 
in the western Shuswap bands, where it seems a person could nof marry a 
  [ARN 
  t A Fe (GSS 
Fig. 252. Ofp Rock Paiings on Big Bear Creek g, Carving on the Bark of a Cottonwood Tree Grosp #15, Rock Piotings 8 Cove nar Bog Crock, 2, Dancer 4, Fixbreach , Person; & Snake; 4, Fir branch; 7, Tattoo-maks. iy Crom; 7, Rough crows 4, Sashes 5, Man wih a of or ornches m Sar; oy Crossrail with upright ks £, Firbranehs 5, 7, Firtrants wih, croing dicks Fi bench 4, Peon] sy Man ith Pedra of sng fehers; Sam, Ri. 
member of his own crest group. Nobles also generally married within their class; but sometimes they married common people of their band, or untitled strangers. 
When a man's wife died, he was supposed to seck another wife from among her sisters or cousins. Levirate prevailed in a strict manner, as among the Thompson people! If a man did not wish to take to wife his brother's widow, he called all the people together, and said, *I wish you all to know that I do not take my brother's widow to wife, and I herewith give her to my friend (mentioning his name), who will henceforth be the same to 
  
+ See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 321, 322 et seq. * Ibid. p. 323. * Ibid, p. 325.

----

592 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
me as my deceased brother was. Naw it will be the same as if my brother were alive. My friend (mentioning his name) and I will henceforth be the 
same as brothers until one of us dies” The man then gave a feast to the 
people, and the widow took her place with the husband chosen, or he with her. 
As a rule, the woman's consent to the arrangement was asked beforchand. 
Polygamy flourished. At the present day all marriages conform to the 
rites of the Roman Catholic Church. 
Custons ReraTixe To Wosex. — The customs regarding women were 
the same as existed among the Thompson Indians. The only fresh meat a 
menstruating woman might eat was flesh of the female mountain-sheep. 
Women at no time ate the head-parts of any animals; and but few men ate 
them, except they were shamans. When an animal was killed, the head and 
“mystery” parts — such as the heart and kidney — were generally given to 
the nearest shaman, or to a shaman who was a relative of the hunter. Men 
never smoked women's pipes. Women, when going for wood or water, never 
passed the part of the lodge where men's heads were when they slept. As 
a punishment for adultery, or suspected adultery, a wife's hair was cut off 
on one side of her head by her husband. Buri Custons. — The burial customs of the Shuswap were almost the 
same as those of the Thompson tribe. The body was laid out and buried 
in the same manner, and the customs and ceremonies connected therewith 
were also the same? Burials were generally made near villages, on the 
edges of terraces, in low side-hills, and in sandy knolls. As far as known, 
they were never made in caves or rockslides. Relatives were buried together 
as much as possible. Poor people and old people who had no powerful 
relatives were not buried. Their bodies were carried away some distance 
and deposited on the ground, or occasionally on a rough scaffold of poles 
and brush. The remains were then covered with a mat, and piled over with 
brush and sticks. Frequently they were covered with bark and stones, where 
these were handy. The bodies of warriors dying on the warpath or in a 
strange country were generally burned, so that the enemy could not sport 
with them. Warriors who were seriously or mortally wounded sometimes 
chose to be burned alive! The warrior was placed on the top of the pyre, 
and sang his warsong until enveloped by the flames. As among the 
“Thompson tribe, many things were interred with the body, such as gambling- 
sticks, knives, weapons of all kinds, pipes, dentalia, ete. All moccasins worn 
by the deceased were buried with the body, for any one who used them 
would get sick or die. Slaves were sometimes killed and buried with the 
dead. Most graves had poles erected over them, to which were attached 
some of the deceased's property, and offerings from friends, consisting of a 
      
© See Vol. of this series pp. 326, 327. * Ibid, pp. 327, 338. 3 Seep. 554.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 593 
buckskin, old gun, etc. The best or favorite dog of the deceased was killed 
at the grave, and the body hung up on a pole or to a tree near by. The 
tails of all the horses killed and eaten at the funeral feast were also hung 
on the gravepole. If a man possessed a canoe at his death, it was generally 
broken up. Canoes were never drawn up and overturned on the grave, and 
grave-efiigies were unknown. Tents were seldom erected over graves, but 
sometimes conical and oblong lodges of poles were erected over single 
burials and groups of graves of wealthy people. Oblong and circular fences 
of logs, and poles, were erected around many graves, especially in the west. 
It has been mentioned before that among the Cafion division, and to a lesser 
extent among other western bands, what appears to have been carved figures 
of the crest were erected at graves. At the present day the Shuswap graveyards arc very plain, cach grave 
being surrounded by a picket fence painted white, or white and black, and 
surmounted by a plain wooden cross at cach grave. 
Simon Fraser, in 1808, said of Shuswap graves, “These Indians do not 
burn their dead, but bury them in large tombs, which are of a conical form, 
about twenty feet diameter, and composed of coarse timber.” ! Nursing infants were never buried alive with the mother. 
As among the Thompson, wealthy people took up the bones of their 
relatives every few years, and reburied them in new blankets or robes. 
Fresh grave-ofierings were suspended on the grave-pole at the same time, 
and a feast was given to all the people who came to witness the ceremony. 
The customs regarding the people who handled corpses were the same as 
obtained among the Thompson Indians.* There were very few restrictions on widows and widowers. They had 
to sleep on a bed of fir-branches, without robes underneath them, and had 
to wash cvery morning at some stream, rubbing their bodies, and especially 
their cyes, with fir-branches. Children whose parents had died had to do the 
same. No fir or rosebush twigs were worn, nor special head-bands, neither 
did they wander around at night and supplicate the Day Dawn. Buckskin 
thongs around neck and wrists were not used by the western Shuswap, but 
in all parts of the tribe a thong was worn round the right ankle after the 
death of a parent, and orphan children generally wore one around each ankle. 
Orphans had to drink salmon-oil, so that they might not become thin. 
The period of mourning lasted one year. Mourners must not eat fresh meat or fresh fish of any kind, excepting salmon, else the people would 
have bad luck hunting and fishing. The funeral feast, or “paying-off® cere- mony, was the same as among the Thompson Indians At a person's death 
  
+ See Fraser in Masson, Les Bourgeois, tc, p. 167. * See Vol I of this series, p. 331. 
» Ibid, p. 334.

----

594 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
no strings of hoofs were used to keep away the ghost, and no miniature 
deer were shot at, neither were children made to jump over their parent's corpse, as among the Thompson people. Mourners cut their hair as among 
the latter tribe. If a widower was troubled by his deceased wife's ghost 
appearing to him, or if he had frequent bad dreams regarding her, he heated 
stones, covered them with earth, and spread sage-twigs thickly on the top. 
On this he slept, and the ghost troubled him no more. If a widower were 
to hunt within too short a time after his wife's death, he would be attacked 
by bears. The custom of warriors killing an enemy whenever a son, brother, 
or father died, was found among many southern and western bands. The 
victim seems to have been considered as an offering to the dead relative.

----

XII. — RELIGION. 
Coxcerriox or he Worn. — The former Shuswap beliefs are rapidly 
changing, under the influence of education, and association with the whites, 
and the teaching of the missionaries. 1 obtained the following old beliefs 
regarding their conception of the world, almost all of which are similar to 
those entertained by the Thompson Indians. 
The earth is believed by some to be circular, while others think that it 
is nearly square. It is surrounded by lakes, to which the edges of the sky 
descend on all sides. At the beginning the earth was very small, but it 
gradually became larger, emerging more and more from the waters. 
Other people personify the carth, and believe that it controls the elements 
and seasons, thus cnabling people, animals, birds, fishes, and plants to live. 
Some Indians believe that the earth gradually increases in size, and is still 
growing. They expect it to dic some time in the distant future. When the 
Earth Spirit is too hot, he makes the weather cool; or, in other words, the 
Earth, being an animated being, feels the heat, and cools himself. He tires of 
being covered with snow, and makes the weather warm, and the snow melts. 
When dry, he makes rain come. When he shakes himself, there is an 
earthquake. 
Some of the present features of the earth were made by transformers 
during the mythological age. The people who inhabited the earth during 
this period partook of the characteristics of both men and animals. They 
were called speta’kul. Some were cannibals. At that period many kinds of animals, birds, and fishes, did not exist, 
nor many kinds of trees, plants, and berries. The carth was much troubled 
with great winds, fires, and floods. 
In those days the Old-One, a personage to be described presently, sent 
Coyote to travel over the world and put it to rights. He was gifted with 
magical power beyond that of all the other mythological beings, and had 
great knowledge and cunning; yet often he proved himself to be selfish, 
lazy, and vain, doing many foolish and bad tricks. In fact, he was fond of 
amusing himself and playing tricks on other people. Nevetheless he did a 
great deal of work which benefited people, and did away with many evil 
beings. Although Coyote was a long time on earth and travelled all over 
it, yet he left much of his work undone. Probably his greatest work was 
the introducing of salmon into the rivers, and the making of fishing-places. 
All the best fishing-places on the large rivers were made by him. Another 
[595]

----

596 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
work that he accomplished was the creation of the seasons and of day and 
night. He did many wonderful things along North and South Thompson 
and Fraser Rivers, and all over the Shuswap country. When the time came 
for him to leave the earth, he disappeared, and no one knows where he went. It is certain that he did not die; and it is expected that he will come 
back some day, and do wonders on earth again. Many Indians claim that 
Coyote disappeared towards the east, and that from that direction he will 
re-appear. Other transformers were Ca'wa or Sa‘memp, Kokwe'lahiiit, and Ee#'sa. 
Ca'wa taught the people various arts; Kokwe'lahait and Ee#'sa rid the world 
of many evil beings who preyed on the people. 
The Old-One® was the chief of the ancient world, and finished the work 
of Coyote and other transformers, leaving the earth in the way we see it at 
present. He travelled in the form of an old man, but sometimes he changed 
his appearance. He was all-powerful in magic, and always able to do what 
he took in hand. He never acted the fool, like Coyote. Whenever he 
played any tricks, they resulted in good. When he appeared, no one knew 
who he was; and he travelled rapidly over the country, performing much 
more work than Coyote, in much less time. He made transformations 
wherever he thought they were required. He fattened the land in some 
places, and raised it in other places. Where it was too dry, he made lakes; 
and where there was too much water, he made it dry. He put the sun and 
moon in their proper positions, and made rain and snow to fall at the proper 
seasons. Some say there was no rain in the world until he caused it to 
come. He also regulated the winds, telling them the proper directions from 
which to blow, and when to be calm. He introduced trout into many of 
the streams and lakes, and ordered salmon to ascend new rivers. He made 
many new kinds of trees, bushes, and plants to grow in places where they 
were required. He introduced certain kinds of animals, such as the deer, elk, bear, and hare, and told them to multiply. Before that, they had lived 
all together in their own worlds, underneath the ground. He told the 
people to be respectful to them, use them properly, and not make them angry. At that time the people were all poor and foolish, and he taught 
them what kinds of animals, fishes, and roots to eat. He also taught them 
many methods of catching, procuring, and preserving food, and how to make certain tools and weapons. He introduced sweat-bathing and smoking, and 
taught the people how to make baskets, snowshoes, and canoes. He trans- 
formed the remaining bad people into animals, birds, fishes, and rocks. 
Where he found too many people in one place, he told them to move, and 
live in other places. He led the different tribes into the countries which 
they now inhabit, and gave them the languages they were to speak.   
Compare Teit, Traditions of the Thompson Indians, pp. 48 et seqc

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 597 
The present Indian tribes are therefore descendants of the good people 
of the mythical period; but, as they were not all equally good, therefore 
we find some people better than others at the present day. When the Old- 
One had finished his work, he disappeared towards the east, and no one 
knows what became of him. Some say he went to the sky, where he now 
watches the carth, and makes rain and snow; others think he became chief 
of the dead, and lives in the spiritland, whence he sometimes sends messages. 
The Indians expect him to return some day, and make the world better even 
than it is. It is said, Coyote may precede or accompany him. Many bowlders, 
rocks, and cliffs are pointed out as transformed people or animals of the 
mythological period. 
The conception of thunder is the same as among the Thompson Indians." 
The thunder-bird is large and black, and covered with down or short downy 
feathers. Some part of its body — according to many, its head — is 
bright red. The sun, moon, stars, rainbow, and aurora are transformed people of 
the mythological age. The shadow which ascends the mountains as the sun 
sets is said to be a man called Sexkwallpem. This was discovered by a lad who had many times at evening climbed the mountains in an endeavor to 
pass the shadow and reach the receding sunlight. One day he was successful, and was surprised to overtake an old man climbing with the aid of a staff, 
who said to him, “Ah! you have long wanted to find me. Well, now you 
see me. I am Sexkwalpem, whom you have sought to overtake so often. 
Tell no onc that you saw me’ For many years the lad kept silence, but 
at last thought he might divulge what he had seen. After he had told the 
story, he expired. All the stars have practically the same names as among the Thompson 
people Those without names are believed to be members of a war-paity 
of carthly people who were slaughtered by the sky people and transformed 
into stars. The Milky Way is called “trail of the dead.” and is said to have 
been a dusty trail used by dead people, which was transformed as we sce 
it now. Some people believe that two groups of people, possessed of much magic, 
control the warm and cold winds. They live at the extreme south and 
extreme north of the carth. The north people send cold winds against the 
people of the south; and the latter send warm winds against the people of the 
north, who dislike heat. Therefore south winds are always warm, and north 
winds cold. The people keep the winds in bags in their houses. When the 
people of the south feel a cold wind blowing, they say, “The north people 
wish to kill us” and they open one of their bags containing wind of the 
  
1 See Vol. I of this series, p. 338. 2 1bid., pp. 341 and 342.

----

598 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
required heat, and let it blow until the atmosphere becomes quite warm. If 
they squeeze the bag, the wind blows more strongly: and if they squeeze 
hard, it blows a gale. 
The Chinook wind was kept in a bag by the people of the south. The Fox and Hare stole the bag and liberated the wind, so that all people might 
be benefited. The people of the south, in revenge, tried to burn the world 
by a great fire, which spread over nearly all the earth. The latter was 
flooded — some say by the muskrat or beaver — to drown the fire, and 
many people perished by either flood or fire. It is said that at first the earth was exposed to gales of winds, to cold, 
heat, and drought. Eventually the wind was snared by a person named 
Sna'naz, and induced to moderate its strength. 
Some people say that the house of the wind is situated in high 
mountains, near the head of Bridge River, where there are many caves and 
hollow rocks. When any one treads near this place, the wind becomes strong 
and a whirlwind passes over the mountain-tops, or it thunders and rains. 
Spirits — the land and water mysteries — inhabit many places, most of 
which are harmful. The land mysteries live chiefly in mountain-peaks and 
caves; and the water mysteries, in certain lakes, especially those having no 
outlets, and in waterfalls, bogs, and springs in the forest, particularly those 
surrounded by moss and reeds. Certain marshes and muskegs also have 
spirits. Ancient rock-paintings have mysterious powers, and may hide and 
show themselves at will. They are supposed to have been made by people 
long ago; but through the agency of the dead, or by the supernatural 
influence remaining in them, they are in a manner spiritualized. Some people 
think they were made by the spirits of the place or by beings of the 
mythological age. 
At a place called Sulta'tkwa, opposite Peq, on Riskie Creck, there is a 
spring on the top of a rock. Here the people sometimes took a light pole, 
and, after painting pictures on one end, pushed it into the spring. A few 
days afterwards the pole would be found thrown out by the water on the other side of Fraser River. A long time ago this spring is said to have 
sent out intermittent spouts of water. Young men used to sleep here and train themselves. 
At another place below Chimney Creck there is a hole in the ground, and the noise of flowing water can be heard far below. A stick thrown 
into the hole will be found on the opposite side of the Fraser in the morning. 
These places are also considered to be full of mysterious power. 
The spirits residing in some parts of the mountains are kindly disposed, 
and do not dislike having people ‘walk around on them.’ In these places 
visitors do not need to paint their faces or to make offerings. When they 
leave, “the mountains cause rain to fall” in those spots. They are then said

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 599 
to be weeping because the people have departed, as a mother does on the 
departure of her children, or a wife when her husband leaves her. 
In all parts of the Shuswap country, but particularly in the east, there 
are stories relating to the ‘water mysteries’ of various lakes and ponds. 
These beings are more or less malign, but vary in character. Most of them 
are described as half human and half fish, or part animal and part fish. 
They cause storms on lakes, swamp canoes, and make rain fall when people 
fish. In certain places, when people see them, they die. 
The Indians believe in a race of dwarfs which were at one time numerous 
in many parts of the country, but are said to be seldom seen now. They 
are about two feet tall, and gified with great magic. Their women dress their hair in a knot at each car, like pubescent girls; and the men tic theirs 
in a knot at the back of the head, in the manner of pubescent lads. They do not harm people, and are as wild as game. 
A race of giants are believed to have been, until lately, quite numerous. 
They are great hunters and runners, and possessed of immense strength. 
The smallest ones are four or five times the height and strength of an 
ordinary man, while the largest are only comparable to trees. They are of a gray complexion; and probably on that account, and also because of their 
tallness, they arc often called “bleached or gray trees” They are also called 
“burned trees” probably because at a distance they look all black. Their 
dress consists of cap, robe, belt, leggings. and moccasins, all of black-bear 
skin. It requires an entire medium-sized black-bear skin to make one of 
their moccasins. They are able to carry four large buck-deer on their backs 
at one time with the greatest ease, and it is said that one of them killed 
two black bears, and shoved them one into cach side of his belt, as an 
ordinary, man would do with two squirrels. They very rarely molested 
people, but sometimes stole fish, of which they are very fond. 
Beings called tema'ut or temtemana'ut are said to be occasionally seen. 
They are described as very short, — from about four feet to four feet and 
a half tall, — with underset strong bodies, sometimes obese, and with heads 
of peculiar shape. They are said to be very wild, and to live in holes in 
the ground. They are believed to have no real language, but make jabbering 
noises. Once the Soda Creek people noticed their footprints at the mouth 
of Deep Creek, and found that they led to a number of holes in a slide 
near by, where there were many springs. They watched from above, and 
saw the tema'ut emerge from the holes at dusk, and repair to a shingly bank near the mouth of the creek, where they began to play. At daybreak 
they suddenly disappeared. One night the people surrounded them, and lay 
in wait. Just when the day began to break, they rushed on them as they were playing, and succeeded in capturing one girl. The others escaped, and 
never showed themselves at this place again. The girl was very wild and

----

600 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
could not talk. After a long time she became tame, and gradually learned how to speak. She married a Soda Creek man and had many descendants. 
They were all short, stout people, and partook of all her characteristics. 
They were superior, both physically and mentally, and all of them were 
great wrestlers. 
The most general belief scems to have been that the land of souls was 
in the extreme south. When a soul left the earth, it travelled downwards 
along the streams or followed the great waters south, finally reaching the 
land of souls. Some people, however, believed that souls went to the country 
of the sunrise, and yet others thought they went to the sunset. Shamans 
claim that they have followed souls far to the south, but no Shuswap 
shaman has ever claimed to have reached the land of souls. Therefore 
people knew of that land, and the conditions of the souls therein, only from 
the words of prophets who had apparently died, and whose souls had been 
there, and who had returned to life. Some of these asserted that they did 
not recognize the direction or location of the trail they followed, but that 
they arrived at what appeared to be the land of sunrise, where the shades 
lived. Others declared that the trail they followed went over the sky 
(probably the Milky Way), at the far end of which lay the land of souls. 
Thus there may have been several trails leading to the spiritworld. It is 
said, however, that there is but one spiritland, and that it must be somewhere beyond or at the edge of the world. The land of souls is described as 
always warm without being 00 hot, and the berries as always ripe. The ground is covered with grass always green, and there'is a great profusion 
of sweetsmelling flowers of many colors. The appearance and climate of 
the country is much like the nicest parts of the high mountain-ranges in 
summer days; but without any flies or mosquitoes. When the people are 
hungry, they sing, and a deer falls down dead; they sing again, and it is 
cooked, ready to cat. When they have finished their meal, they sing again, 
and it becomes alive again. When they pick fruit and afterwards return to 
the bush, .there are as many berries on it as before. There is no death, 
sickness, bad weather, cold; no fires or houses. 
There is a belief that cach species of animal has a world of its own. 
The entrance to the Black Bear world is situated in the Green Timber, not 
far from Bridge Creek. It is said to have been discovered by Indians more 
than once; and one man, after travelling a long way through a cave or 
passage in the earth, emerged to find himself in a country swarming with 
bears, and no signs of any other animals. The entrance to the Hare country 
is believed to be somewhere north of the Carrier country. The elk and 
buffalo also have underground worlds of their own. Some say that the 
entrance to these is in the Cree country. The entrances to these worlds 
are kept concealed, and are very hard to find, but some Indians have

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 601 
discovered them. Generally the entrance is at the foot of some small hill. 
Similar beliefs are found among the Thompson Indians." 
Pravers AND Opservaxces. — The prayers and observances of the 
Shuswap were quite similar to those of the Thompson Indians! People 
painted their faces and asked for good luck or good weather when approaching certain lakes and other parts of the higher platcaus and mountains. They 
also made offerings to peaks and to the genii of certain places. Among some bands the people would repair from time to time to the gaveyards, and 
pray to the dead not to harm them, but to help them. They said, “We are one people with you, and will join you soon. We will then be happy 
together.” It seems that on those occasions they sometimes gave to the dead 
offerings of food and other things. So far, 1 have not heard of any custom 
like this among the neighboring tribes. 
There was a feast of first-fruits at the commencement of each berrying- 
season, when the first fresh service-berrics were eaten. The people, during 
the feast, had to eat all the berries that 
had been picked; otherwise they would 
be unlucky. If any were left over, there 
would be a poor crop next year. In 
some places the chief prayed over the 
berries, asking that there might be a 
good harvest every year, but it scems 
there was no ceremony of offering part \ 
of the firstfruits to the earth or the Fig 25s Facl ining representing Rene ountains. Clond and Rai 
If there had been a long spell of cold weather or of dry weather, and 
the people wished mild weather or rain, a shaman whose guardian spirit was 
the rain painted his face with perpendicular red stripes or with dots in red; 
or the upper part of his face with stripes, and the lower with dots (Fig. 253). 
These probably represented the rain-cloud and the rain. He went out of 
the house and walked around in a circle with the sun, singing his rain-song, 
and saying, “My guardian spirit will go around the world until it meets rain 
(or mild weather, as the case might be), and will bring it here” Then he 
told the people, “If my guardian spirit finds it quickly, rain will fall soon, 
probably to-morrow but if he cannot find it quickly, it may be two or three 
days before rain falls.” 
Another method of obtaining mild weather in the winter-time was to let 
a pubescent girl light a fire and heat some stones. When they were about 
red-hot, she took them with tongs and threw them into the snow, praying 
to the carth or weather to become mild and melt the snow, in the manner 
these stones had done. 
    
T See Vol. T of this series p. 343. Tod, pe uae

----

602 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
When people went to hunt in mountains where mountain-sheep live, 
the sheep made it disagreeable for them by causing a cold wind to blow, 
or snow or fog to come. If it was a place frequented mostly by ewes, the 
people took a cwe's tail, and, after singeing it in the fire, pointed it at the 
sun and asked for clear weather or warm sunshine. If it was a place 
frequented by rams, they burned in the fire a whole ram's-horn or some 
parings from a ram'shorn spoon or from a horn, and asked for mild 
weather. — If people wished the weather to become cold, they burned wood 
from a tree which had been killed by lightning. — A person’s death affected 
the weather in the same way as is believed by the Thompson Indians.) — 
Unlike most of the latter, the Shuswap burned wood on which a dog had 
urinated. — A dog which got in the habit of urinating where a woman had 
urinated was always killed. It was believed that a dog doing this had the 
effect of stopping the woman from becoming pregnant, or tended to make 
her barren. It was also thought that a 
dog getting into this habit would ere 
long desire to have connection with the 
woman. 
As among the Thompson Indians, 
there were no ceremonies regarding the 
first salmon. The Indians say the salmon 
is a ‘hard’ fish, and people need not be 
Fig. py Bear uners Face ining representing careful about it. It has no real “mystery.” 
~ Women did not pass the back nor 
the head of a man lying down, without warning him. This was principally 
because they might startle the man, and his guardian spirit might harm 
the women. 
Respect was shown to animals to please them and to secure good luck 
in the chase. When a bear was killed, the hunter sang the grisly or black 
bear song, as the case might be, and prayed, “Oh, thou greatest of all 
animals, thou man of animals, now, my friend, thou art dead! May thy 
mystery make all other animals like women when I hunt them! May they 
follow thee and fall an easy prey to me!” Before the hunter returned to 
camp, he painted his face all black with charcoal, or painted the grisly-bear 
or black-bear paw design on each cheek (Fig. 254). Another design used 
by him was a blackened face with darker black streaks down the cheeks, 
which represented the claws of the bear. Then the people knew that he - 
had killed a bear. He himself never told, for the bear would be angry if 
he boasted. When he asked the people to go and help bring back the 
meat, he said, “We will go and carry in our friends or, ‘Let us go and 
    
See Vol. T of this series p. 374.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 603 
carry in what our friend has given us’ Skulls of all bears killed were 
raised on the tops of tall poles. The bones of the first deer killed on a hunting-trip were generally 
burned. No meat of deer or any animal killed for food was given to dogs 
until the people had first had a meal of it. If the meat were given to dogs 
first, these animals would be angry, and afterwards not allow themselves to 
be shot. Women also had to eat meat after the men, or the deer might be offended. A shaman, — if one were present, — or the slayer of the animal, 
generally ate the first morsel. When a childs tooth came out, the child ran in the direction away 
from the sun, and threw it back over its shoulder at the sun, praying, 
“May my teeth grow quickly?” Instead of doing this, the tooth was sometimes 
embedded in a piece of meat and given to a dog to swallow. This was 
believed to make the new teeth grow quickly. Cut hair was thrown into 
the river. No particular care was taken in disposing of parings of finger 
and toe nails, which were simply thrown away. 
People made freshets subside by taking a grave-pole or other stick from 
a graveyard and throwing it into the water, The bones of the first beaver trapped by a party or person were thrown 
into the river. Smoking by the elders generally preceded all councils and important 
ceremonics. Before smoking, the pipestem was pointed to the east. In 
prayer the face was generally turned toward the east. This was invariably 
the case with pubescent lads and girls when addressing the Day Dawn. 
Four was the sacred number in ceremonies and in mythology. The 
Shuswap offered prayers to the chief of the dead, to the dead, to the sweat- 
house spirit, and to powers like the earth, day dawn, sun, darkness, animals, 
guardian spirits, water; and even to the plants they used for striking them- 
selves with in the sweathouses, such as aldertwigs, sage-twigs, fir-boughs, 
and nettles. It seems that the western Shuswap, during puberty, prayed 
oftener directly to animals, and other Shuswap more to the Day Dawn, etc. 
A few men had small images of stone, generally made to represent men, which they kept in their medicine-bags. They were carved from 
soapstone; and some were perforated, so that they could be used as tubular 
pipes. 1 failed to obtain any information regarding the use of these, because they went out of use long ago. 1 did not succeed in finding any old men 
who had ever seen any. It seems, they had some connection with the 
guardian spirits. They seem to have always been rare, at least among the 
western bands. | have heard vague reports of similar images having been 
in use among the Thompson Indians a long time ago. Frsmvats. — The Shuswap had religious festivals and dances similar 
to those customary among the Thompson tribe. The dance was performed

----

604 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
by the people of each band at irregular intervals. Most bands held it once or twice a year, at the midsummer or midwinter solstices. The dances were 
performed regularly for a time, whenever a message came from the spirit- 
land. Afier a while they would fall into abeyance until another message 
came. The songs sung at the dances are supposed to have been obtained 
from the spiritland. These ceremonies were expected to hasten the return 
to earth of the souls of the departed, and the beginning of a golden age, 
when every one would lead a life of ease and happiness, and when the 
dead would be re-united with the living. It is also said that the chief of 
the dead, who is evidently identical with the Old-One of mythology, advised 
the Indians to perform these ceremonies. They were also said to make it 
easier for the dying to reach the spiritland, and to make life there morc 
pleasant for them, and to strengthen the bonds between the living and the 
dead. It was also believed that no more messages from the spirit-land would 
come if the ceremonies were not performed. The following story will help 
to throw light on the nature of these dances. 
The Alkali Lake band had not performed their ceremonial dance for 
many years, when an aged woman fell into a trance; and the people, thinking 
she was dead, carried her away some distance, and laid her on the ground, 
covering her over with some old mats and a pile of fir-brush, in the manner 
that poor people were buried. Eight days afterwards the people were 
surprised to hear her singing, and some of them went to investigate. She 
said to them, ‘I am not dead. I have been to the land of souls, and the 
chief has sent me back with a message to the people. Let the people 
assemble, and 1 will give it to you” For several days the people flocked 
there, until a large concourse from all the northern and western bands had 
assembled. She said to them, “I saw all your dead friends. They are happy 
and dance, and sing many strange songs” Then she gave the names of 
the people whom she had seen, — many of them persons of whom she 
could not possibly have had any knowledge on earth. She continued, “The 
chief gave me several new songs, such as arc sung by the shades, and sent 
me back to earth to teach them to you, and also to show you the proper 
way to dance. The chief said that the people on earth should sing and 
dance like the people of the spiritland, so that they may become like them 
as far as possible” Then the people danced in circles in the same manner 
as the Thompson Indians! and she stood in the centre and directed them. 
She said, “You must all dance in pairs, each man with one woman. It is 
wrong for a young man or a young woman to dance alone. Young people 
must dance in couples, holding cach other's belts, and in this way choose 
cach other for husband and wife. The chief told me no bachelor man or 
  
See Vol. 1 of this series, Figs. 203, 204.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 60s 
maiden women of age will be received by him. Their souls will be turned 
into animals. All the people of marriageable age who have died single 
since the beginning of the world have been changed into animals. Therefore 
all young people who do not wish to meet the same fate must marry, and 
marry as carly as possible” The people danced eight dances that day. The 
woman described the land of shades, and sang all her new songs. They 
were like the songs of the souls. The dancing was kept up with great 
energy for several days, and after the people dispersed they continued to 
dance every few days at their homes for several months. Afterwards they 
repeated the dance from time to time. The woman said she had been given - 
the name Tazle'k by the chief, and henceforth people called her by that 
name. She lived many years afterwards, and could fall into a trance and 
go to the land of souls whenever she desired. Hostile shamans had no 
power over her. She could prophesy and tell who was going to die, and 
at what time. She would sometimes mention a person's name, even that of 
a Lillooet or Thompson Indian whom the people did not know, saying, ‘He 
entered the spiritland last night. I saw his soul.” Upon inquiry, the people 
would learn that a person of that name had really died. Each time she 
brought a message or a new song from the spiritland, she assembled the 
people and held dances. Once she brought a message, saying the chief had 
told her it was better for men to have two wives. 
People performing this ceremonial dance stripped off most of their 
clothes. Most of the men wore only a breech-clout and belt, and the women 
a kilt and belt. Some of the western Shuswap adopted cedar-bark sashes 
and head-bands with long trailers, which they wore when dancing. These 
were probably copied from the Chilcotin, who used them in other dances of 
their own. People painted for the dance in red and white, generally laid 
on in narrow perpendicular stripes, which is said to have been in imitation 
of the way dancers painted in the spiritland. In these dances people 
supplicated the chief of the dead. 
Guaroian Sirs. — Guardian spirits were the same in character, and 
acquired in the same manner, as among the Thompson Indians. A few men 
inherited them from their parents, but these were never so powerful as those 
acquired by themselves. This is illustrated by the following story: — 
The guardian spirits of Sixwilexken's father were fire, water, the owl, 
and the coyote. These often appeared to him in dreams, and advised him. 
Fire always accompanied the others when they appeared. These protectors, 
however, were never of much value to Sixwilexken, for they did not really 
belong to him, and therefore he did not know the proper way to use them. 
Water, besides coming to him from his father, was also acquired by himself 
when training, and consequently he understood it perfectly, but the others 
he did not understand.

----

606 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Most men had several guardians, but generally one was much more 
powerful than the others. Those of some men were wholly helpful, and 
could not be used to harm any person; while others had exactly the opposite 
properties. In some parts of the tribe the dog, coyote, and water were 
considered the most powerful of all guardian spirits. Other very powerful 
ones were the dead, cannibal, fox, tobacco, grisly bear, wolf, cagle, and pipe. 
The tobacco, pipe, and fox guardians were inseparable. A person obtaining 
the one also obtained the others. In the same way the coyote and the 
cannibal were associated. The scalp guardian was often associated with the 
cannibal. Guardian spirits generally thought to possess considerable power, 
and much used, were the thunder, loon, pinto horse, white horse, weapons 
of all kinds, hunger or famine, mountain-goat, otter, beaver, hare, owl, fire, 
rain, blood, woman, black bear, deer, scalp, man, boy. The woman guardian 
was sometimes called the “singing woman.’ She was not an ordinary woman, 
and was acquired in conjunction with the black bear 
or the deer. This is illustrated by the following 
story: — 
A young man was training in the mountains, 
and a deer appeared to him and gave him advice, 
saying, “You will hear singing and have a dream, 
to which you must pay strict attention if you desire 
to be successful in future years” That night he 
heard a woman singing, but on searching failed to 
by 8 Guardian Spirit find her. Giving up the search, he lay down in 
his sweathouse to rest, and fell asleep. He dreamed that a woman appeared 
to him, having her face painted with white and yellow horizontal stripes on 
her cheeks, and yellow perpendicular stripes on her chin (Fig. 255). She 
said, ‘I am the deer, and the woman you heard singing. Through me you 
may have success and be great. Whenever you desire my aid, paint your 
face in the manner in which mine is painted, and I will appear to you and 
help you. When in trouble, if you smoke your pipe, I will at once come 
to you and give you thoughts, and thus advise you what to do. If you 
desire a woman to love you, paint your face in secret in the manner in 
which she paints hers, and her thoughts will at once turn to you. If you 
desire a woman's affections, do not at first show, that you care for her more 
than for any other, but smoke your pipe within view, so that she can see 
you well; meanwhile think of this woman; and as you smoke, she will love 
you more and more. At last she will weep when you are absent; then you 
have gained her love entirely. Thus you will have power over women's 
affections, but you must never lie to them. Always tell them the truth, and 
never force them in any way. If you desire to be lucky at gambling, always 
invite women to watch you playing; and if you win much, give them some 
  Fig. 255. Face 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 607 
presents. As long as they watch you playing, you will win; but if no women watch you when you play, you will lose. Do as I direct you, and 
you will always be successful at gambling and with women.” Thus this man 
obtained as his guardian spirit the deer who had changed into a woman, 
and he has generally been very successful in gambling, and has had several 
good wives. He is now an old man, and lives at Canoe Creck. 
The guardian called the “man” was a fox who could assume the form of a man. He was often called the “smoking man.’ 
Of the guardians, the thunder, weapons, blood, and scalp were most powerful for warriors. The dead and the wolf were powerful guardians of 
shamans, while for other people their assistance was of less value. The 
cannibal had power to assist particularly the shaman and the warrior. The loon, otter, pinto and white horse, were generally acquired by shamans. The 
woman, black bear, and deer were said to be powerful for gamblers. Some 
men acquired guardian spirits of a certain number, which seem to have 
possessed qualities of their own sufficiently different from that of the units of 
which they were composed to mark them as distinct. Among these were 
seven straws, seven trees, twins, two lakes, two boys, four plants, twenty 
coyotes. Guardians in the form of fish were very rare. Persons partook largely 
of the character of their guardians; for instance, a man who had the goat for his guardian could travel on steep rocks better than other people. 
A man who had the swan for his guardian spirit could make snow fall 
by dancing with swan’s down on his head, or by throwing swan’s down on 
the water. When a man was a hunter, his profession became almost part of his 
nature, and the animal he hunted almost part of himself. If he was bewitched, 
and therefore had bad luck in hunting, he developed an extreme desire to 
kill game and an intense craving to eat its meat, and in this way became 
more seriously sick than a person similarly situated who was not a real hunter. 
If a man became sick, his guardian spirit told him what to do to get 
well. The following story exemplifies this idea: — 
Sixwilexken got very sick, and thought he would die. Then his 
guardian power appeared to him in a dream, and told him that if he cut 
his hair and made an offering of it to the sickness, he would recover. The 
next day he had his hair cut, and burned it in the fire, at the same time praying to the sickness, ‘I cut my hair and offer it to thee, sickness. Now 
leave me, so that 1 may recover. After this he soon became well. In this 
way his guardian spirit saved his life twice. The guardian spirit also gave advice which insured success in hunting 
and gambling. Some men were told to kill a squirrel or some other small 
animal first, when going out hunting, and thus to secure success. One man

----

608 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
was told when he hunted, and saw the first deer, not to shoot, but to sit 
down and smoke his pipe. Afterwards he would be sure to see many deer 
and kill some. 
Another example of this kind is given in the story of a gambler who 
had two boys for his guardians. They appeared to him, and told him, 
whenever he lost at playing lehal, to hold his right hand at his back for a 
while, and to paint a red stripe down from each corner of his mouth, and 
another red stripe across the bridge of his nose from ear to ear (Fig. 256). 
If he followed this advice, he would 
always be lucky. Whenever he had bad 
luck at playing lehal, he did as he had 
been directed, and invariably his luck 
changed so that he won. 
A hunter was told by his guardian 
the owl to smear his gun with the blood 
of each animal that he killed with it, 
and in this way he would always be 
lucky. He did as directed, and was always successful in hunting. 
A warrior called Teat'uz (Cut-across-Middle or Torn-Stomach), who was 
half Thompson and half Lillooet in blood, had his stomach ripped across in 
a fight. He claimed that his guardian appeared to him and told him he 
would always be successful in war if he changed his name to Tean'uz. 
When he had fully recovered from the wound, he changed his name as 
directed. Some Indians believed he did so because he was proud of the incident. 
Ever afterwards he cut a gash across the stomachs of all his victims. 
Some warriors painted their bodies 
the color that their guardian's body was 
believed to be, and most men painted 
their faces and bodies as directed by 
their guardians in dreams (Fig. 257). 
Many also arranged their clothes, orna- 
ments, and hair as directed. A great 
warrior called Stemtitsa painted his face 
and his whole body above the navel Fig. 357, o Warors Face Painting; A Face 
black. Ha'tspeqain, another great warrior, Petorog wpmentag » Seog, 
dressed his hair in one long knot or “horn” standing out from the left side 
of his head, and painted the left side of his hair, face, and body black. 
When dressed, he painted the left side of his clothes black. The right side 
of his hair, face, and body, was painted red. Sometimes he wore a woollen 
blanket, shirt, and blanket leggings. The right half of the shirt was made 
of red blanket, and the other half of black or very dark blue blanket. His 
right legging was red, and the left one black. He painted his right hand     Fig. 256. Gambler's Face-Painting. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 60g 
and the moccasin on the right foot red, and the left black. He wore a quiver of horse:skin, and his arrows were all painted red and white. He 
would continue to dress this way until his guardian told him to change. At 
a later time he wore a headdress made of the entire skin of a black-bear 
cub. The skin of the skull fitted on his head; and the rest of the skin was 
cut in a long fringe which hung down his back, to each strip of which were 
attached several eagle feathers. Some men always rode a horse of a certain 
color. A shaman called Tcelésket rode a white horse, the mane and tail 
of which he always painted red. He also painted a red stripe from the 
horse's nose to his tail along the backbone, and red spots on the animal's 
sides. Eagle-feathers were used for decorative purposes by all men, and 
especially by warriors. Horses were also decorated with them. They were 
not used by shamans only, as among some tribes. 
For a lad, while training, to dream of a black bear or a deer which 
changes into a woman, or a woman who says to him ‘I am the black bear 
or the deer is a good omen. He obtains them for guardians, and will be 
successful in gambling and in love. The woman is one of the best guardians 
for a man who wishes to be a gambler! For a lad to dream of a man 
smoking, who says to him ‘I am the fox,’ is also a good omen. He will 
get the fox, tobacco, and pipe for guardians, and be successful with women. 
By smoking with strangers he can make them his fast friends, even if they 
were evilly disposed towards him, and by smoking with women he can make 
them love him. The fox in ancient days was a great traveller, and noted 
for his ability to make peace with people. Those who have the fox and 
tobacco guardians, and fully understand them and rightfully use them, cannot 
be bewitched nor hurt by shamans. A boy and twins are very lucky 
guardians for gamblers. 
Some men were told by their guardians in dreams to eat only certain 
parts of some animals, or to eat certain parts of an animal first, or to eat 
certain parts raw, or cooked in a particular manner, and by doing this they 
would always have luck in hunting. Some men were told to paint their 
faces in a certan way when they hunted, or after killing game, and by doing 
this they would be successful in hunting. Men were also told to change 
their names, so as to have good fortune. The guardian spirit told them 
what name to take. 
Parts of animals, such as the heart, hoof, bone, hair, til, etc., were claimed as protectors by certain men, but generally they only represented 
the guardian in about the same way as a hawk’s feather in a man’s head- 
band represented the hawk as one of the man’s guardians. 
A man was sometimes told by the guardian spirit to hold certain parts 
of animals sacred; and thus, according to the way some Indians look at it, 
See p66.  

----

610 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
these particular parts of the animal were of prime importance, for they 
represented the means by which the guardian power exercised its mysterious 
influence. 
Thus a deer’s tail, although called a man’s guardian, might, in the first 
place, be only a symbol, and have no special powers apart from the whole 
deer; or it might be the mystery part of the guardian power by which alone 
the latter could exercise its functions. In this case the part was more 
important than the whole, but still not altogether distinct nor independent 
of it; while, in the first case, the part was subordinate and formed an un- 
important part of the whole, having no practical value excepting as a symbol. 
It seems, however, that there was a third class of things called guardians, 
which, although parts of a whole, were guardian spirits in the full sense of 
the word, and were looked upon as independent beings, with powers of their own, distinct from those of the whole object or animal of which they were 
part. Probably the best example of this class is blood. Only a very few warriors had the mystery of the scalp. They scalped 
their enemies, and wore the scalps or scalp-locks on their persons. On their 
return from war they held a scalp dance, which was similar to the dances 
described before! The men having the scalp as their guardian often had 
the cannibal as well. It seems that in the scalp dance the dead warrior was 
addressed in nearly the same manner as a killed bear is in its songs. 
Some people, besides their ordinary guardians, had other protectors which 
they impersonated in dances. 
Once at least, during the winter, the people gathered in the largest 
underground house, and each in turn sang his mystery-song, — cither the 
most powerful song obtained from his guardians, or the one best adapted 
for the purpose of the ceremony. This is said to have been done for the 
purpose of discovering whether any sickness were approaching, whether any 
one had been bewitched, or if any other evil were threatening. As nearly 
all the men were possessed of some shamanistic power, their spirits watched; 
and if they saw or found any influence that would be harmful to the 
community, they reported it in their song. Thus the people were warned, 
and prepared to defend themselves. Each man, in his song, told whatever 
was wonderful or important that had happened to his spirit since last they 
sang the mystery-songs. A very few of the men danced when they sang. Another object in holding this ceremony was to train all the youths in 
the singing of their mystery-songs, to give them self-confidence, to find out 
how they were progressing in their training, what their guardians were, and who among them was likely to become greatest. 
It seems that the Shuswap women held no dances during the absence of 
  
+ See pp 578 et seq.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 611 
war parties. Before departing, the warriors held a war dance similar to that 
customary among the Thompson Indians. The war shaman sang alone, and 
danced in a circle, moving against the sun. He prayed in his song for 
success of the party, and that their enemies might become as women. When 
he had finishetl his shaman’s song and incantations, the war chief, decorated 
in feathers and war-paint, joined him and struck up his warsong. Then all 
the warriors followed and danced in a circle, moving in a direction against 
the course of the sun, singing, and dashing their spears to each side, and 
praying that they might thus easily kill their enemies. When the dance was 
over, all the men put their contributions of dried fish in a pile, some giving 
more, and others less. Then the shaman cut up all the fish, and distributed 
the pieces to the warriors, who sat in a circle, making the rounds in the 
direction opposite to the sun's course. Each warrior had to receive an equal 
number of pieces, without any being left over. If the shaman did not 
succeed in making an even division, he took the fish back, placed them in 
a heap, and covered them with a blanket. He retired to a spot a short 
distance away, danced, and sang, facing the pile, and using his shamanistic 
power through incantations to make the division come out even the next 
time. If he failed four times in this division of the war provisions, it was 
considered a bad omen, and the party did not start. At all war councils 
the pipe was passed in a direction opposite to the sun's course. Warriors 
often painted their old wounds or scars red. 
Tie Sour. — The beliefs regarding the soul and ghosts were similar 
to those held by the Thompson Indians! The soul can leave the body at 
any time, and wander around like a ghost, or go on the trail of the dead 
towards the spiritland. A person becomes sick when his soul leaves the 
body for any length of time, or he becomes crazy. Shamans and people 
with shamanistic powers can see souls. If a soul is seen wandering around 
a graveyard, it is a sign that the person to whom it belongs will die soon, 
unless the soul is restored to the body. Souls of suicides do not reach the spiritland for many years. At the present day many believe that they will 
remain wandering around the carth until the judgment day. Souls of drowned 
people also do not go to the spiritland for a long time. . 
Ghosts are the shadows of souls. The ghost bears a close resemblance to the person to whom it belonged, and is seen dressed in the manner 
peculiar to that individual. It docs not need to have the shape of the 
person at the time of death. 
Souls of deceased children are occasionally reborn of the same mother 
or of a near relative. Some say the chief of the dead pities the mother and 
sends the child back again, and others think dead relatives help the mother    
  
* See Vol. I of this series, pp. 357, 358, 359.

----

612 “TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
to have another child soon, similar to the one taken away by them. There 
is no interchange of sex: a male is reborn a male. In a very few cases 
adults are said to have been reborn by a loved relative, — a belief which 
is found rather strongly developed among the Athapascan. Souls were never 
reborn as animals. 
There was a belief that the Old-One and Coyote would return to earth, 
bringing the shades with them! This cvent was to be preceded by the 
appearance of one or more transformers, who were to make the world a 
place of happiness for the living and for the dead. The chief transformer 
to usher in those good times was to be Coyote, who, after completing his 
task, would disappear, and in a short time re-appear with the Old-One, or 
the chief of the dead, and accompanied by all the souls from the spiritland. 
When the Indians saw the first priests, they believed them to be Coyote 
and his assistants, presaging this important event. At the present day many 
of the old Shuswap beliefs are disappearing; and most of the Indians believe 
in heaven, hell, purgatory, and a judgment day, as taught by the priests. 
The fatalistic idea that everything has a time set for its death is held by many. 
Sramanisi. — The Shuswap beliefs regarding shamanism were practically 
the same as those held by the Thompson tribe. Very few Shuswap shamans 
accompanied their practices by dancing, while this was the custom of almost 
all the Thompson shamans. Most of them sang, the remainder practising 
without song or speech, or simply by speaking. They cured people by 
exorcising the disease, by incantations, by certain prescriptions, by laying on 
of hands, by massaging parts of the body, and by sprinkling water on the 
head, and blowing it over the body. 
Shamans, when in search of sickness or of souls, often wore mat masks, 
as among the Thompson tribe. The soul was restored to the body through 
the top of the head, between the crown and forchead. Most shamans were 
believed to be able to pull out sickness with their hands, or suck it out with 
their mouths. A very few used bone tubes for sucking through. Pulling 
was the method resorted to for taking out ‘shots’ fired into the body by 
shamans or other persons practising witchcraft. When the shaman had 
removed or pulled out the “shot” which had been fired into the body of the 
bewitched person, he asked the people if he should let it go. If they said “Yes” he blew on it. and it disappeared; but if they answered “No, the 
person who owned it has bewitched too many people. then the shaman put on his mask, and in secret gave it to his own guardian spirit, or he threw 
it into the fire, and asked his guardian spirit to see that the person owning 
the “shot” should die at a certain time. A shaman will die if his guardian spirit is destroyed, or if it is 
  
+ See p. 596.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 613 
imprisoned, so that he cannot get it back. A person could also be bewitched 
by taking possession of the soul and imprisoning it in a medicine-bag. Some men had “medicine-places’ where their pho lived, — as, for instance, 
the place of sunrise, or the place of sunset; and when they bewitched a 
person by taking his soul, they sent it to these places, where it was kept 
captive by their guardian spirit. In such cases the shaman had to put on 
his mask, and, travelling in spirit to the place, attempted, with the aid of 
his guardians, to take back the soul forcibly from its captors. If he failed 
in his task, he became sick himself, and felt like a man who had received 
a severe thrashing. Some Shuswap and Carrier shamans could bewitch a man by taking a 
little earth from the spot on which he had stood, and placing it in their 
medicine-bag with the skins or other symbols of their guardians; then the 
man became sick or died. 
Sickness or death was often seen by people in the form of a small 
bank of mist hanging over or moving around some low or wet spot. Other 
kinds of sickness, especially epidemics, are mysteries, or evil spirits, which live 
underground, and occasionally come out and travel around. They are most 
liable to appear during hot weather. Shamans who had the cannibal for 
their guardian spirit often became insane when they became old. 
The guardian spirits of some always caused sickness of a certain kind. 
Therefore, when a person was bewitched, an expert shaman could generally 
tell the name of the person who had caused the sickness. 
If two shamans with equally powerful guardians tried to bewitch each 
other, both died at the same time, or one shortly after the other. 
None of the Shuswap shamans were ever able to reach the land of 
souls, as Thompson shamans frequently did. 
A few women were shamans, but their practices differed in no way from 
those of the men, and none of them were very powerful. 
The following stories about shamans will give a clearer idea of the 
beliefs of the tribe: — 
Most of the Teuxkexwank people (Buckskin Creck band) were living 
in two large underground houses. A man got sick, and a shaman tried to 
cure him. After much trouble, he found the cause of the sickness, and, 
sucking it out, held it between his hands so that the people could see it. 
It was like a small piece of buckskin. He went outside to throw it away. Dividing it in two, he blew on it, and threw it up into the air, asking it to 
leave. The two pieces went different ways, one piece striking the ladder of 
one underground house, and the other picce settling on the roof of the second 
house. As soon as they touched the houses, they changed to clots of blood. 
Within two days all the people of both houses died. 
According to another version, the shaman treated the sick man and    

----

614 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
pulled the sickness out. He called to the people, ‘I have his sickness, but it is different from any disease I have ever seen. It is like a piece of 
buckskin” He showed it to some people, and asked one of them to cut it as it lay between his hands. One man took a sharp knife and cut down 
between the shaman’s hands, dividing the buckskin in two. Then the shaman 
threw away the pieces, and they fell on the roofs of the underground houses, 
changing to blood. The shaman at once fell down dead, and all the people 
became sick and died inside of two days. 
Another celebrated shaman of Soda Creek called Sqe‘get (‘spider’) 
deolared “I have seen a great evil ‘mystery’ travelling in our country. It 
will throw sickness on us. It will attack us; it is a mystery sickness 
(epidemic). We must try to dispose of it” He and three other shamans cut four sticks, and, sharpening the points, stuck them into the ground. 
Then putting on their mat masks, their souls went to search for the sickness. 
It was very hot weather, and the people squatted on the ground near 
by, watching them. The shamans called out, “We need not go far. See, 
it is coming here, we will meet it” They ordered the people away some 
distance. At last they said. “It has arrived” Now they told the sickness 
or mystery to leave, or to return whence it came, but it would not go back, and the shamans could not make it return. Neither could it pass 
them. Then the shamans took their sticks and dug a hole in the ground. 
Now the mystery tried to pass the shamans; and when it came to the 
mysterious powers with which they intercepted it, the combat was so 
violent that the earth shook as with an earthquake, and the people's dogs, 
which were tied, broke their halters and ran away, yelping with fear. The 
children also began to cry. Then the shamans seized the sickness, and with 
much exertion pushed it into the hole they had dug. It got out several times, but they rolled it back again with their sticks, and at last covered it 
with some earth. They said to it, “You must go away beyond the habitations 
of people, and must not come out of the earth this side of Fort George, 
for beyond that place there are no people” At last the mystery left, and, 
travelling underground, came out beyond Fort George in the shape of a 
gale of wind, which blew northward so violently that it devastated the 
country, in some places overturning all the trees. “No other Shuswap shamans 
were able to master “mystery sickness” like those of Soda Creek. 
The following story is also instructive: — 
An old shaman belonging to Clinton once lost his soul. He sang, and 
blood came from his mouth. He was wearing a marmot-skin robe fastened 
around the middle with a belt, and tied on his left shoulder. After singing, 
he went outside and gathered frozen excrements of the people, with which 
he filled the front part of his robe above the belt. Returning, he held up 
cach piece before the people and ate them one after another. When he had

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 615 
finished, he sang again, and then went outside looking very wild. The 
people said, “His soul has gone from his body.” When he came in again, 
he walked around, talking foolishly and looking wild. Then Sixwilexken — 
a shaman whose guardians were all helpful — asked him to sit down and 
smoke with him. Sixwilexken took his pipe out of his medicine-bag, and, - 
filling it with tobacco, he lighted it with a stick at the fire. After taking a 
few puffs, he handed the pipe to the insane shaman. The latter took four 
puffs, and then cried like his guardian the fox. Sixwilexken put some water 
on the crown of the shaman’s head and blew on it. Then, relighting the 
pipe, he took a few puffs and handed it back to the old man. The latter 
took a few puffs, and then fell down as if in a swoon. Very soon he arose 
and crawled over to his bed, where he lay down and fell fast asleep. When 
he awoke, Sixwilexken invited him to smoke again. He was now in his 
right mind, and smoked quietly, as was his wont. He conversed properly, 
and seemed to have no recollection of what he had done. When the people 
told him of it, he would not believe them. 
Some shamans who were said to have cannibals for their guardians acted like madmen. The cannibal was a dangerous guardian for a person 
to have. It was so powerful that it frequently made the persons who 
possessed it insane, and transformed them, as it were, into cannibals. One 
shaman was found eating bodies in a graveyard. The people took him away, 
but he could not be restrained from returning. If he knew of a corpse, he 
wished to eat it before burial. At last he was killed by an Indian in 1859 
Another shaman repaired to the place where a person had died; and 
when he saw the corpse with froth on the mouth, he said, “Nem, nem!” 
(the cry of this cannibal when scenting food), and, going up to it. he licked 
all the froth up with his tongue. Afterwards this shaman became crazy, and 
before long died. 
A shaman of Kamloops, called Teelé'sket, always rode a white horse, — 
as many shamans do, — the tail and mane of which he always painted red. 
He also painted a red stripe along the animal's back from nose to tail, and 
red spots on its sides. Tcelé’sket’s principal guardian was the wolf, and he 
generally wore a wolfskin poncho painted or daubed with red. One day, 
when gambling with a man of another band, he lost his horse, and felt very 
sore about it. He expectd the man would be afraid of him, and return the 
horse, which was a favorite and the only white one he possessed. When 
he left, he said, “No one can win my horse with impunity.” That fall the 
man became sick, and his body and limbs became doubled up and stiff, 
especially his back. It was believed that Teelé'sket had carried out his 
threat and bewitched him. A shaman was called, who, after singing nearly 
all day, declared that Tcelé'sket had shot him with his mysterious power. 
He said, “This kind of sickness is caused only by Teele'sket; it is peculiar

----

616 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
to him’ The next day the shaman continued his practices, assisted by his 
son, who was also a shaman. He painted his hands red, and his son painted 
his wrists red. The old man struck the man's back with his hands very 
hard, while the young man pulled out the sickness. The young shaman lay 
down on his face near the fire, holding the sickness in his hands, while his 
father moved in circles around the fire, singing. The son joined him. At 
last they stopped near the sick man, who was sitting close to the fire. The 
young shaman said, “I hold the sickness shot by Tcelé‘sket in my hands, 
and can do with it as I will. Shall I kill Tcelé'sket, or let him go” The 
people answered, “Kill him?" The shamans said, ‘Build a large fire” and 
the people heaped a number of small sticks on the fire, making it very hot. 
The father put his mat mask over his son's head; and the latter, singing, 
went to the fire and threw the object into it. Then he lay down near the 
fire and did not speak for a while. At last he arose, and, taking off the 
mask, said, “I have given the sickness to my guardian the loon; and next 
spring, when the birds come, Teelé'sket will die” As soon as the sickness 
was put into the fire, Tcelé’sket became sick and excited; he became almost 
like a madman, and sang and searched all the time, trying to recover his 
guardian spirit, but in vain. Next spring, when the first birds came, he died. The man whom he had bewitched with his supernatural power became 
well as soon as the two shamans had removed the sickness. Yet another shaman had many children, who all died. Their father 
scemed powerless to save them. When the last one died, — a fine 
young man, — the shaman became distracted with grief, and wept very much. 
Whenever he rubbed his fingers over his face to wipe away the tears, blood 
oozed out, and he became terrible to behold. This was a great mystery. No other shaman could do this. 
A similar story is told of another shaman: — 
A man’s face was swollen for a long time, and he asked a shaman to 
cure him. At first the shaman refused, saying he was not able to cure him, 
but at last he consented to try. He rubbed his fingers four times across 
the man’s face, and blood came out in great quantitics. The patient washed 
his face in cold water, and found that he was cured. This shaman had 
blood for one of his guardians. 
The following story shows that shamans were believed to kill by a 
glance of the eye: — 
A party of Fraser River Shuswap went on a journey to Spences Bridge 
to buy dried humpback salmon. When they had arrived within the confines 
of the Spences Bridge band, they saw a large rattlesnake. A Dog Creek 
shaman who formed one of the party called attention to the snake, around 
which they all gathered. During their journey this shaman and some of the 
other members of the party had boasted much, and disputed over their

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 617 
respective shamanistic powers. Now he saw a chance to show his own 
power and belittle that of the others. He asked them to take hold of the 
snake; and when they refused, he laughed and taunted them, saying, “You 
claim to have much power and ‘mystery,’ but now I see you have none. 
You all lied. Now I will show you that I alone told the truth, and really 
have mysterious powers’ Going up to the snake, he looked sternly at it, 
and it bent low and ceased rattling. It seemed to be cowed, and lay quiet. 
The shaman seized it by the neck, and, after holding it up for a while, 
threw it among the people, who ran away. He laughed, and said, “Why 
do you run away from a dead snake” When they examined it, they found 
that it was quite dead. The people were all surprised, and said nothing. 
The Shuswap were much afraid of rattlesnakes, for there are none in their 
country, except in the extreme southern part. 
Propuets. — Prophets occasionally made their appearance; but all, so 
far as remembered, were persons who bore messages from the spiritland. 
They all spoke in a similar manner to the woman Tazle’k, already referred 
to in this chapter! 
Ermical Concerts AND TeacmG. — These were exactly the same as. 
among the Thompson Indians. Evenings were spent in playing games, 
smoking, and general conversation among the elders; and in relating stories 
of war and hunting, and comic stories. About bed-time mythological tales 
were told by some old person until the people all fell asleep. On the 
following evening another elderly person told stories, and thus all the people 
who knew any myths took turns at relating them throughout the winter. 
These were the times when the old people would address the young, and 
when they would admonish them to follow the rules of proper ethical conduct. 
 

----

XIII. — MEDICINE, CHARMS, CURRENT BELIEFS. 
Meoicive. — The Shuswap agree with the Thompson Indians in saying 
that formerly they were, on the whole, a larger, stronger, and healthier race 
than they are now. Very few children died, sickness was not common, and 
many lived to an extreme old age. As among the Thompson people, a large number of herbs were used as medicines; and when people got sick, 
they at first resorted to them for remedies. If they failed to do good, it 
was thought something was wrong with the soul, and a shaman was called. 
I heard of the following plants being used as medicines: — 
Soapberry-Bush (Shepherdia_ canadensis). — Stalks and leaves boiled slowly for twenty-four hours. The person fasted all day, and drank four cupfuls of the decoction at night. Acted as a physic next morning. Decoction of roots and stems drank in sweat-houses for purification. Barberry-Bush. — Bark and twigs boiled, and decoction drank as a physic. Hudion Bay Tea or Labrador Plant. — Decoction drank as a tonic or beverage, and also given to dogs for purification. Bearberry-Plant (Arctosiaphylos Uva-ursi). — Leaves and small stems boiled slightly, and decoction drank as a tea or beverage. Thoroughly boiled, the decoction is used as a diuretic. Arabis Drummond, — Decoction used as a diuretic. Devil's Club (Fatsia horrida). Decoction drank after child-birth. Mountain Juniper (Juniperus communis). — Decoction drank at child-birth; also used for sore eyes. Sage- Bush (Artemisia. tridentata). — Decoction of twigs drank for purification in sweat-houses. Twigs dipped in water used for rubbing the body when sweat-bathing. Leaves put in the nostrils for colds. Sage-Bush and Mountain Juniper logether. — Twigs bruised, and decoction used by hunters 2s an eye-wash to make them clear-sighted. Sage, Juniper, and Soapberry logether. — Twigs boiled, and decoction used in sweathouses as a drink and a wash for purification. White Fungus which grows on trunks of large trees. — Used by pubescent lads for rubbing on the body to give them strength. White and Black Lichens (smude’ls)) which grow on rocks. — Boiled, and decoction drank by lean people to make them fat. ‘Alder. — Twigs dipped in water and used for rubbing the body when sweat-bathing. Fir (Pseadotsuga Douglasii). — Twigs used in the same way as alder-twigs. Decoction drank in sweat-houses for purification. Common Nettle. — Used for striking and rubbing the body when sweat bathing. Fach bunch of netlles, sage-wigs, fir-twigs, or alder-twigs, afier having been once used for rubbing the body, was thrown away to the west. 
  For sudden pains, or for colic and cramps and the falling-out of hair, 
the same medicines were used as among the Thompson Indians! Several 
See Vol. of tis serie, pp. 368 and 369 
[6:8)  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 619 
powders of crushed and burned leaves, and ointments made from grease and 
gum of trees, were used for sores and burns. Hot water and powdered 
charcoal were sometimes used for flatulency. Charcoal is rubbed over the 
cycbrows or around the eyes to prevent snow-blindness, or if the eyes are 
inflamed. 
Ciarws. — A male and a female cricket are tied together with a hair 
from the head of the woman or man who is to be charmed. This has the 
effect of binding their affections together, and is used as a love-charm by 
persons desiring the affections of parties of the opposite sex. 
The Shuswap claim that none of the plants growing in their own country 
were much good as charms, but some of those procured from the Thompson and Okanagon were very effective. A plant with a strong smell, and from 
which a kind of steam riscs, was a very sure lovecharm. It is called 
Neckélisten by the Thompson and Okanagon, in whose country it grows. 
It was used in various ways, ie. worn as a necklace in the daytime next 
the body, and put under the pillow at night. Before falling asleep, the 
person must think of the woman whose love is desired, and next morning 
early must wash in a creck and pray that by the power of the plant the 
woman may love him. Other effective ways are to give a woman a present 
of something scented with it, or to smoke with her, using some of the plant 
mixed with the tobacco. If a man carries this charm and walks up-wind, 
women will be so attracted that they will follow him. — A plant, probably 
Parnassia fimbriata, is rubbed on some part of the body, such as the brow 
or the soles of the feet, to insure luck in hunting. — Snakes’ tails are 
sometimes worn as a preventive of headache. — When one person wished 
to poison another, he took saliva from the mouth of a corpse, and, mixing 
it with salmon-oil, put it in a place where the person was likely to see and 
drink it. Putrid flesh from a corpse which has been buried (brush-burials) 
was used as a poison in the same way. — White hellebore (Veratrum viride) 
was also used as a poison. 
Owens xD Bewiers. — When a person sees the bird called sokwa’z 
(probably a kind of crane), it portends the death of a relative very soon. 
This kind of bird is rarely seen. — To see an xlusetken snake (the kind 
sometimes nicknamed double-headed snake) foretells death. — If the whiskey- 
jack (or Oregon jay) comés to the camp and utters its cry, a deer or other 
animall will be killed by the hunters next day. If it cries like a child, a child will dic soon. This bird is “mystery,” and always knows where to find 
meat, of which it is very fond. — To meet a black lizard on the trail portends bad luck or the sickness and possible death of a friend. — The same beliefs 
are entertained as among the Thompson Indians, regarding the crying of the 
owl and the coyote, and the finding of a dead shorttailed mouse on a trail. 
The Shuswap also dread the black lizard, and have the same beliefs regarding

----

620 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
it as the Thompson tribe. They jump over the campfire, so that the lizard 
following them may enter the fire and destroy itself A person being drowned causes rain. — Twins, by bathing in a lake or 
stream, cause rain or storm. — To break eggs of the ptarmigan produces rain 
or snow. — Burning of hair or the horns of mountainsheep brings mild 
weather. — Burning of wood of a tree struck by lightning will make cold 
weather. — Burning of hare’s fur will cause cold weather. — It seems that, 
unlike the Thompson belief, the mentioning of the coyotes name and the 
burning of his hair do not bring cold weather, neither does the burning of 
beaver's hair make the weather mild. — The head of the foolhen was used 
as a die, but only in fun. — If you sneeze, some woman is mentioning your 
name. — When the ear rings, the dead are speaking of you. — To feel a chill go down the back shows that a ghost is standing near you. — If the leg or 
arm twitches, some onc is coming to visit you. — If whistling is heard at 
night near the camp, and if a person can't sleep, or if his sleep is troubled 
with bad dreams or nightmares, it is a sign that ghosts are around, and the 
camp should be shifted to another place. — If twins. are quiet, their father 
will have poor luck in hunting: but if they play boisterously, and hug and 
bite each other, he will have good luck. — To dream of spots of blood is a 
sign of murder or war. To dream of lightning striking is the same. — The 
grisly bear is like the wisest shaman, and hears everything said about him. — 
A person's death or birth makes a change in the weather. — If a man sweats 
in company with a woman in a sweat-house, he will turn blind or have sore 
eyes. If he has connection with a woman in a sweathouse, he will become 
totally blind. — A person must blow on his arrow before shooting at an owl, 
otherwise he will miss. — A person should not fire his best arrow at an eagle. 
— The carly changing of the weasel's and hare’s coats portends an early 
winter. — A wet or cool summer will be followed by a mild winter, and 
vice versd. — Rain may come from any direction. When it comes from one 
direction, and then, changing around, comes from other directions, and at last 
from the east, it is said to be “going home,’ and the weather will soon be 
dry. The home of the rain is in the west. — The same belief is entertained 
as’ among the Thompson tribe regarding a knot or muscle which moves in 
the left leg.’    
  
 

----

XIV. — MYTHS. 
INTRODUCTORY. — An old Indian named Sixwilexken told me as follows: 
“When I first remember, about sixty years ago, the people of my tribe had 
very many stories, far more than they have now. In cach house they told 
them almost every night throughout the winter. The fullest versions of some 
stories were only known by certain individuals, When a fresh story was 
told, at first the young people flocked to hear it, and afterwards it went the 
rounds of all the houses. The halfbreeds of the Hudson Bay Company 
sometimes camped with or lived for a time among the Indians. They were 
very fond of listening to and of telling stories. I think they probably 
introduced some stories into the tribe. Also, when Indians had been away 
for a time, among people who lived at a distance, — such as Kamloops, 
Spences Bridge, Chilcotin River, or The Fountain, — they sometimes heard 
and learned fresh stories, which they related upon their return. Some of 
these new stories took root for a while, but eventually died out or were 
forgotten. 1 remember having heard stories a few times, and never again 
afterwards. It is possible, however, that some of the stories introduced this 
way became permanent. Many of the stories which were commonest when 
I was a boy are now seldom told, or have been forgotten altogether. Thus 
the number of stories has decreased, and no new stories have taken their 
place, excepting (of late years) some Bible stories introduced by the priests. 
These are looked upon, however, as forming a different class, and are not 
considered the same as myths of the spetakul. Tales of cvery kind are 
not told as often as formerly among the people. When I was a boy, very 
many stories were told about the Old-One or Chief, who travelled over the country teaching people, and putting things to rights. Many wonderful tales 
were related of him; but the men who told these stories are now all dead, 
and most of the ‘Old-One’ tales have been forgotten. The majority of the 
Coyote tales have survived, however, and arc ofien told yet: for they are 
funny, and children like to hear them. Formerly Coyote stories were probably 
commonest of all. Long before the arrival of the first white miners, a Hudson 
Bay halfbreed told the Shuswap that after a time strange men would come 
among them, wearing black robes (the priests). He advised them not to 
listen to these men, for although they were possessed of much magic, and 
did some good, still they did more evil. They were descendants of the 
Coyote, and like him, although very powerful, they were also very foolish, and told many lies. They were simply the Coyote returning to the earth in 
[621]

----

622 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
another form. If the Indians paid attention to and followed the directions 
of these ‘black-robes,’ they would become poor, foolish, and helpless; and 
disease of all kinds would cut them off. If they avoided them, they would 
remain contented, happy, and numerous. Some Indians believed what was 
told them, and for this reason called the first priest whom they saw ‘Coyote.’ 
At the present time some Indians wonder whether, if they had taken the 
halfbreed's advice, it would have turned out as he said, and whether it is 
really the priests and their religion that are the cause of the people dying 
so much, and not being so well off as they might be. Nos. 1-52 of the following tradions were told with variants by Sixwi‘lexken, 
and are characteristic of the Fraser River division and the Canoe Creek 
region. A few variants from the Thompson River region, and a story from 
the Bonaparte division, are included in this series. The provenience of these 
has been recorded in the proper place. The rest of the traditions were 
collected among the North Thompson division.    
1. Covore Tats. 
Coyote and his Son; or, The Story of Katla'llst? 
Coyote lived with his son (or nephew) Three-Stones (Kafla'llst), who had 
two wives, one of whom was old and the other young. Coyote desired to 
possess his daughtersindaw, and made up his mind to get rid of their 
husband. One night he was heard laughing as he approached the house; 
but when he came nearer, he began to cry, and upon entering went to his 
place on the opposite side of the fire and wiped his eyes. He was asked 
why he cried, and he answered, “What I saw to-day makes me sad. 1 saw 
an cagle’s nest with the eaglets nearly ready to fly. 1 considered how highly 
our ancestors valued eagle-feathers, and thought how we had none. 1 wished 
to get them, but knew 1 was too old and stiff to climb up for them.” 
Afterward he said to Three-Stones, “You had better climb for the feathers 
tomorrow. Put on all your best clothes. Our ancestors always dressed 
nicely when going after eagles.” Next morning Coyote took his son to a cliff some distance away, and 
pointed out to him the nest. The cliff was very low, and easy to ascend, 
having many jagged steps leading up to the ledge where the nest was. Then he told his son to divest himself of all his clothes, and leave them 
behind, adding, “Our ancestors always did so” Three-Stones stripped off his 
clothes and ascended the cli. When he had but one more step to take to 
  
+ By the North Thompson Shuswap, Coyote is ofien called Hoxalex. 2 This legend is a_muchudistorced account of Coyores son's ascent to the sky (see Teit, Traditions of the Thompson Indians of British Colambia, pp. 21 et seq; Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin' Indians, p. 29 of this volume.  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 623 
reach the nest, he became aware that something was wrong. Looking below, 
be saw that the cliff had grown to such a height that he was almost afraid 
to look down, and, instead of having rough steps as before, it was now 
smooth. Looking up, he saw that the cliff above was overhanging. He 
was as if in a hole, and could neither get up nor down. Coyote had caused 
the cliff to grow so that his son could not return. 
Then Coyote gathered up his wrinkled skin so as to make it look 
smooth, and tied it in several places on his back. He did this to make himself look young, and to resemble his son. Then, putting on Three Stones’ 
clothes, he went to the lodge, saying to himself, “I will deceive my daughters- 
inlaw.” When he neared the camp, he cried, saying, “Oh! my father climbed 
after the eagle's nest, and was killed, Poor father?” The women thought 
he was their husband, and bewailed Coyote's death. 
He slept with them that night, and on the next morning said, “We will 
move. Father's ghost may visit us, and, besides, we do not wish to be 
reminded of him by seeing constantly the place where he has lived so long.” They shifted camp to a place two days’ journey away. 
Meanwhile Three-Stones sat on the cliff and lamented his fate. Two 
women, the Bush-tailed Rat and the Mouse, heard him, for they were 
gathering Indian-hemp bark on a hillside underneath, and they resolved to help him. They said, “Our nephew is in difficulty. We must try to help 
him? The Mouse sang, and the cliff grew lower until it was only half the 
height. Then the Rat sang, and the cliff assumed its former height and 
shape. Three-Stones descended and thanked the women for their assistance. 
Turning aside a little distance, he pulled out four pubic hairs, and threw 
them on the ground. From these there grew up a dense thicket of tall 
Indian-hemp bushes, which he showed to the v ‘==n, who were glad to find 
a place where they could obtain so much good bark.! Proceeding to his 
camp, he found it deserted, but he followed the tracks of the party until he 
located them. It was night, and Coyote was sleeping with both the women. Three- 
Stones entered, lighted the fire, and waked Coyote, who pretended to be half 
asleep. Then he struck the women, saying, “Why do you roll over so near 
to me? Your husband has come back’ Three-Stones said to him, ‘Say no 
more. You need not try to deceive me” He then took his clothes away 
from Coyote, and discovered the knots in which the loose skin of the old 
man was tied up. He untied it and informed Coyote that henceforth they 
would live apart. Taking the younger wife for himself, he gave the older 
to Coyote and left him. 
  
+ See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 34.

----

624 TEIT, THE SHUSWAT. 
Fox and Hare; or, The Liberation of the Chinook Wind. 
Fox and Hare were brothers who lived together with many other 
people. At that time the earth was very cold, for the Cold People of the 
north ruled the elements, and delighted in having cold winds blow over the 
Indian country all the time. Thus people suffered much, and constantly 
shivered." 
One morning Fox smoked his pipe, and muttered, “Last night I dreamed, 
and gained much knowledge” Then, when he had finished smoking, he 
said to the people, “The People of the Cold have had power over us for a 
long time. Can none of you obtain mild weather? Do you like the cold?” 
They answered, “No! We hate the cold, but we know not what to do” Then Fox said to Hare, “Come with me, and we will obtain warm weather.” 
Taking their bows and arrows, they travelled south many days, until they 
reached the mouths of the large rivers, where the people dwelt who possessed 
the heat and the Chinook wind. These people were called the People of the Heat, [and were enemies of the Cold People| Their chief was the 
Sun? and they lived in warm weather, sunshine, and mild winds. Fox and 
Hare had already arranged what to do and how to act, for the former knew 
everything through his dreams. Entering the house of the Sunshine, they 
saw a large round bag hanging on a post. It contained the Chinook wind. 
Fox ran and struck the bag with his fist, trying to burst it, and the Heat 
People jumped up to stop him but Hare held his bow and arrow drawn on 
them, and they were afraid. Again Fox ran at the bag and struck it. The 
fourth time he tried, the bag burst, and the Chinook wind rushed out. 
Then Fox and Mae ran-along with the wind, and the Heat People made 
the weather exceedingly hot so as to overcome them. 
At last the heat became so intense that the country took fire, and the 
Heat People made the fire run after the wind, thinking it would overtake Fox and Hare, and burn them up. They did not know that the latter were 
the fleetest and swiftest footed of all the myth people. Thus the carth 
burned up for a long distance north, and many trees and people were 
destroyed! Hare kept just far enough ahead of the fire to have time to 
sit down frequently and smoke his pipe. He was the greatest smoker of all 
the myth people. Fox was annoyed at Hare, for, when he told him to 
hurry, he would sit down and smoke his pipe. Fox went on alone, and 
soon left Hare and the fire far behind. He also outstripped the wind, and, 
  
+ Some say it was just a prolonged hard winter, and the people were tired of ts length. 3 Some add this part. + Many say, not the san itself, but the heat of the sun. According to others, it was the sunshine. 4 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indiaus, p. 75. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 625 
reaching the people, he said, “I bring the warm Chinook wind. You will be 
cold no longer.” They could hardly believe him at first; but soon the Chinook wind 
commenced to blow, and, the snow and ice melting under its influence, the 
* people felt the cold no more. Then Fox said, “Henceforth the Chinook 
wind shall be no longer the sole property of the Heat People of the south 
and warm winds shall blow over the north and the rest of the world, melting 
the snow, and drying the earth. Only occasionally may they be followed by 
fire. [Henceforth the People of the Cold shall not always rule the weather, 
nor plague the Indians too much with their cold winds.!]" 
Meanwhile the wind had left the fire far behind, and, there being no 
wind, the fire naturally did not spread, but died out? 
A long time afterward Hare arrived home and met Fox. The latter 
was smoking a fine stone pipe carved and incised with numerous designs, while Hare's pipe was made of wood. 
Fox said to Hare, “You and I are the greatest smokers of all the people. 
Let us run a race. The one who wins shall get the other onc’s pipe, and 
the one who loses shall smoke no more” Hare agreed; and Fox said, “We 
will race on flat open ground” But Hare objected, saying, “I like to race 
where there are fallen logs and much brush’ Fox assented, so they 
commenced to run through a brushy piece of country full of fallen logs. Fox 
jumped over the logs, while Hare always ran underneath them, and thus 
kept easily ahead! Then Fox got angry, and seized Hare as he came out 
from underneath a log, and transformed him, saying, “Henceforth you shall 
be only an ordinary hare, and, as you like to run in the brush, you shall 
henceforth live in that kind of country. You shall no longer be the greatest smoker of the people” Then Fox took Hare's pipe and went home.” 
Coyote and Grisly Bear make the Seasons, and Night and Day. 
Grisly Bear met Coyote and said! ‘I am greatest in magic of all the 
people. When I wish a thing to be, it has to be so. Now I am displeased 
with the short time that it is dark.’ I think it will be better if it is dark 
all the time. I intend to make it so” Coyote answered, “No. That would inconvenience the people too much. Grisly said, “Well, I will have it my   
+ Some add this par. * Some say the fire was stopped by Beaver and Muskrat making a flood in front of it. They flooded all the valleys; and many people who were not quick enoigh to climb up the mountains or go aboard canoes were drowned. + Some say just the reverse of this. 4 Some say managed to keep up even with him. * The fox was considered a powerful guardian spirit among the Shuswap, and whoever had it also gained the mystery of the pipe and tobacco. + Some add that he addressed him as transformer. 7 Some say that at this time the winters were very short, and the days longer than they are now.

----

626 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
way” And Coyote answered, “No, you can't” So the former danced and 
sang, saying, ‘Darkness, darkness, darkness! Let it be always dark” 
And Coyote also danced and sang, saying, “Light, light, light, light! May 
it be light” Thus they danced and sang a very long time; and sometimes the Bear 
got the ascendancy, and darkness would prevail; and, again, Coyote got the 
ascendancy, and light would prevail. They struggled for a long time, and 
neither beat the other. 
At last the Bear got tired, and said, ‘Let there be half darkness, and 
half light” Coyote agreed to this, and said, “Henceforth it shall be light 
from the time the sun prepares to rise until he sets: the rest of the time 
shall be night. Thus every day the sun shall travel; and when he leaves, 
the night will follow him until next day he rises again"! 
Then Grisly Bear said, ‘I am displeased with the length of the year 
and the duration of winter. It is far too short. Let it be the same number 
of moons that there are feathers in the tail of a blue grouse” Coyote counted 
them, and found twenty-two. Thus Grisly Bear wanted cach winter to last 
twenty-two moons? Coyote said, “No. The people cannot endure such a 
long winter. They will all die. Let it be half that number” Grisly Bear 
objected: so Coyote said, “Let there be the same number of moons in a year 
as there are feathers in the tail of the red-winged flicker” Grisly Bear 
thought there were many feathers in the flicker's tail, so he assented. Then 
Coyote continued, “Half of these feathers shall represent the number of moons 
it may snow; and the other half, the number of moons it may not snow or 
be cold” Grisly Bear assented, as he thought the winter would thus be 
almost as long as he desired. He got a flicker's tail, and was surprised, 
when he counted the feathers, to find only twelve; but it was then too late to make any change. Coyote said, “Henceforth the year shall consist of six 
moons of warm weather, and six moons in. which it may snow or be cold” 
Thus Coyote saved the people from having to live in darkness and cold; 
and he determined the seasons and days as they are now. 
Coyote makes Women menstruate. 
Formerly the men menstruated, and not the women. When Coyote was 
working in the world, putting things to rights, he considered this matter, 
and said to himself, ‘It is not right that men should menstruate. It is very 
inconvenient, for they do all the hunting and most of the travelling. Women 
stay more at home, and therefore it will be better if they menstruate, and 
  
! See Teit, Traditions of the Thompeon River Indians, p. 61. + Some say the Grisly wished the year to consist of twenty-two months.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 627 
not the men” Whereupon he took some of the menstrual fluid from men, 
and threw it upon the women, saying, “Henceforth women shall menstruate, 
and not men! 
Coyote and his Hosts. 
Coyote was travelling over the earth. He felt hungry. He saw a 
house, entered, and found it inhabited by an old man called Fat-Man 
(Skia’uzkelestimt)? There was nothing to cat in the house, and he thought, 
“What will this old man give me to eat” The man knew his thoughts, 
and, making the fire blaze brightly, he sat with his bare back close in front 
of it. His back became soft and greasy, and he asked Coyote to eat. ‘Eat 
what” said Coyote. And the man answered, “My back, of course” Coyote 
refused at first; but the man invited him to eat his back. Coyote said to 
himself, “I will bite his back right to the bone, and kill hi Going up to 
the man, he took a big bite; but the piece came away in his mouth, and 
no mark was left on the man's body. He found the food was very good. 
Now he thought he could do- the same thing: so, making a big blaze, 
he turned his back to the fire. But his back burned; and the smell of 
burning hair made the man angry, who threw him outside, saying, “You try 
to imitate me, but you cannot do it. You fool! Don’t you know it is I 
only who can do that?" 
Continuing his journey, Coyote came to another house, which he entered. 
It was inhabited by an old man called Fish-Oil-Man (Stiauzka’instimt). Feeling 
hungry, and seeing nothing in the shape of food, he wondered what this man 
could give him to eat. The man made the fire blaze, and placed a wooden 
dish for catching drippings in front of it. He held his hands over it, with 
the fingers turned down, and the grease dropped from his finger-ends. When 
the dish was full, he placed it before Coyote, and asked him to eat. Coyote 
said, ‘I can't eat that” And the man answered, “Try it. It is good.” 
Coyote then ate some, and, liking it, he finished the contents of the dish. 
Coyote thought, “I will show this fellow that 1 can do the same thing.” 
So, making the fire blaze, he took the wooden dish, and held his hands 
above it, in the same way the man had done. His hands shrivelled up with 
the heat, but no grease dropped from them. This is the reason why the 
coyote has short paws. He cried with pain; and the man threw him outside, 
saying, “You fool! That method belongs to me only.”® 
Again Coyote was travelling, and, coming to the house of a man called 
Beaver-Man (Skala'uztimt), he entered. He felt hungry, but saw nothing to 
    
+ Some add, “They shall menstruste once a month, or with every moon.” + tot is a suffix used in men’s names. 3 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 40.

----

628 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 
cat. He wondered what the old man would give him. The man took a 
sap-scraper and a bark dish, went outside to an alder-tree, and scraped off 
the cambium layer. When the dish was full, he brought it in and gave it 
to Coyote, who had been watching him meanwhile. Coyote said, “I cannot 
eat sticks” And the man assured him it was good, and that it was sap, 
and not sticks. Coyote ate, and found it very good. 
Now he tried to imitate Beaver-Man. He took a sap-scraper and bark 
dish, went to an alder-tree, and scraped off the bark, which he offered to 
the old man, saying, “Eat some of my food” The man, seeing it was only 
bark, threw it away, and said, “Why do you try to imitate the methods which 
you ought to know belong to me only? 
Coyote continued his journey, and reached the abode of an old man 
called Kingfisher-Man (Tsalasti'mt), who lived in an underground house near 
the water's edge. He entered the house, feeling hungry, and looked around 
for food, but could see none. He thought, “What can this fellow give me to eat!” The man stripped the bark off a willow-bush, and made a string 
of it, which he put around his waist. Then he ascended to the top of the 
ladder, gave a cry, and dived down into the water through a hole between 
some driftwood." Coyote watched; but, as he did not see him re-appear, he 
thought he must be dead. At last, however, the man came up bringing a string of fish, which he cooked and placed in a dish in front of Coyote. 
The latter refused to eat, saying that it was bad food. He was, however, assured that it was good, and ate it all. 
Then Coyote made a bark string, went to the top of the ladder, and 
cried like a kingfisher. Then he dived into the hole. But his head stuck 
fast, and he would have been drowned had not the man pulled him out, saying, “You fool! Why try to imitate the method that belongs to me alone?” 
Coyote travelled along, and came to an underground house in which 
people were dancing. He looked in, but saw only a row of different kinds 
of snowshoes, which were standing on their ends all around the house. As 
soon as he left, the dancing commenced again; and when he looked in, it 
stopped. Then he entered and seized one of the snowshoes; and the others 
at once attacked him, striking him all over the body. He threw down the 
snowshoe he had seized, and ran out? 
He continued his journey, and soon he came to another underground 
house, which was quite full of small children. He said to himself, “I will 
play a trick on them. went in, took off his moccasins, and showed the 
children some cracks in the heel of his foot. He said, “My shoes are full 
of holes, and my feet have become very sore” Then all the children went 
  
1 Some say a hole in the ice. + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 41. + Ibid, p22

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 629 
out and brought in gum, which they gave to Coyote. That night, when 
they were all asleep, he daubed their eyes with gum, and then left the house. 
The mothers of these children were Blue (or Dusky) Grouse, Willow 
(or Ruffed) Grouse, Prairie-Chicken (or Sharp-tailed Grouse), and Fool-Hen 
(or Franklin's Grouse). When the children awoke in the morning, they could 
not open their eyes, and, wandering around, lost one another, and could not 
find their way back to the house. Their mothers arrived, and after some 
difficulty found them all, and cleaned their eyes. 
The children told them that Coyote had played them this trick: therefore 
the Grouse followed his tracks until they caught sight of him. The trail 
followed along the brink of a precipice. They passed Coyote unobserved 
and hid themselves near the precipice. at considerable distances apart. As 
Coyote came along, he sang, “They will never find their children, 1 have 
tricked them!” While he was thus singing, Fool-Hen arose suddenly from 
cover, and startled him. When he saw who it was, he said, “Oh, it is you! 
1 suppose you are going home. Well, you will find your children all well” 
Going on, he commenced to sing again, and forgot all about meeting Fool- 
Hen, when suddenly Prairie-Chicken arose, and startled him as he leaned 
over backwards. He said to Prairie-Chicken, “You will find your children 
all well? and continued his journey, and again commenced to sing, when 
Willow-Grouse flew out, and startled him so that he nearly fell back over 
the cliff. He recognized the Grouse, and said, “You are going home. You 
will find your children all well” He kept on his way and sang his song, 
when suddenly Blue-Grouse arose in front of him with a loud noise, and 
startled him so much that he lost his balance and fell right over the cliff 
into the river below. 
Here he was in danger of drowning, and transformed himself into one 
thing after another; but, as none of them floated satisfactorily, he at last 
changed himself into a piece of plank. Thus he drified down the stream 
until he came beyond the Lower Thompson region! where he was stopped 
by a weir belonging to two sisters who inhabited that country, and who were 
noted for their magic. On the next morning, when the women came to 
their weir to catch salmon, they saw the piece of plank, which they picked 
up, saying, ‘We will take this piece of wood home. It will make a nice 
dish? They made a plate of it; but each time they ate off it, the food 
would diminish so quickly that it disappeared before they had taken many 
mouthfuls. At last they became angry and threw it into the fire, saying, 
“There is too much magic about that dish.” 
Coyote immediately transformed himself into a little baby boy, and cried 
from the centre of the fire. The women said, “Quick! Pull it out! We 
  
+ Some say the mouth of the Fraser River, or near the mouth.

----

630 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
will rear it as our child;” for they had no husbands or children. They made 
a carrier for him, and when they went to bed they placed him between them. 
When they were both asleep, Coyote arose and had connection with them, 
returning again to his cradle. Next morning, when they went to wash 
themselves, one of them said, “I feel queerly. My abdomen is all wet” And 
the other replied, I also feel strange. There is blood between my legs” — 
“How can this be said they, “when no men are around?” 
Soon Coyote outgrew his carrier, and the women alternated in carrying 
him on their backs when they travelled about. He annoyed them very much, 
however, for he would constantly slip down lower and lower on their backs 
until he managed to have connection with them. 
Thus the women kept him for a time, until one morning he arose early, 
and, going to the weir, broke it in the middle, and crossed to the opposite 
side of the river. When the women awoke, they searched for him, went to 
the weir, and found that it was broken and the salmon were passing through 
in great numbers. Then they noticed Coyote walking up the other side of 
the river; and he called to them, ‘I am going back to my country. If your 
children are males, rear them; but if they are females, stick them on the 
points of tree-branches” The women said, It is the dog of a coyote who 
has been fooling us, and playing tricks on us” They were unable to mend 
the break in their weir, for Coyote had beaten them in magic. They said, 
“Coyote has stolen our salmon, and has left us pregnant” Coyote now 
conducted the salmon up the Fraser River to its source, and afterward up 
the Thompson River. This is the reason why the Fraser River is a superior 
salmon stream to the Thompson River. He said, “Henceforth every year, 
this season, salmon shall run up the rivers, and the people of the interior 
shall fish, and eat them. They shall no longer be kept at the mouth of the 
river, nor shall the people there have a monopoly of fishing and eating them.” 
As he went along, he cleared the waters of the rivers of obstructions, 
and arranged the banks so that it should be easy for people to fish for salmon 
as they ascended. The people were grateful for this great work of Coyote. 
Coyote and Grisly Bear. 
(Fraser River and North Thompson Division.) 
Coyote visited the old Grisly-Bear-Woman, and said to her, ‘I wish to live, with you. You arc a nice old woman” She assented, and he took up 
his abode with her. He had not been there long when he thought he would 
play her a trick. She was in the habit of defecating while sitting on a pole 
which she had laid across a deep, narrow gulch. One day while she was in 
  
+ See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 37.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 631 
the house, Coyote went to this place, and, after cutting the stick nearly 
through in the middle, told it to break the next time Grisly-Bear-Woman 
came to use it. Soon after he returned, Grisly-Bear-Woman went to defecate, 
and Coyote watched her from the top of the underground house. 
Grisly-Bear-Woman had just finished when the stick broke, and she fell 
to the bottom, where she was covered with dung, which stuck to her fur. 
Coyote was so amused that he rolled over and over on the ground, laughing. 
Grisly-Bear-Woman wiped herself and went home. As she entered, 
Coyote went out, and, coming in again, sniffed, and said, “I smell excrement.” 
Then, looking at one of his feet, he said, ‘I must have stepped on excrement.” Sniffing again, he held up his other foot and looked at it also. Grisly-Bear- 
Women felt ashamed, and, going outside, wiped herself again. As she 
returned, Coyote went outside, and, entering again, sniffed and looked at his 
fect, as before. Grisly-Bear-Woman went and wiped herself again. When 
Coyote had done this four times, Grisly-Bear-Woman went to the water and 
washed herself. It was now wintertime. and Coyote thought he would play another 
trick on Grisly-Bear-Woman. Taking some dead leaves, he threw them into 
the river, and they changed into salmon. Then he took some dry service- 
berries from the trees and threw them at the bushes, thus making them green, 
and laden with many fresh berries. He went to the house, and informed 
Grisly-Bear-Woman that many salmon were running and the service-berries 
were ripe. She would not believe him: therefore he took her along and 
showed her the salmon and the berries. When they returned to the house, 
he said to her, “There is no use eating old food when there is plenty of 
new to be had. Let us cat all your stores of provisions. There is no use 
keeping them. Tomorrow I will help you pick berries, and afterward I 
will help you catch salmon. After you have enough of both, I will leave 
you and go on a journey.” 
Grisly-Bear-Woman agreed to this, and, bringing out her stores of dried 
salmon and dried berries, spread them in front of him. Then Coyote and 
Grisly-Bear-Woman ate all day and far into the night, finishing all. 
Then Coyote said, “We will sleep for a while. and early in the morning 
we will start to pick berries” When Grisly-Bear-Woman had fallen asleep, 
Coyote put a rotten log in the place where he used to sleep, and covered it 
over with his blanket. Then he left the house, and caused a cold wind 
to blow, which withered up the leaves and berries he had made grow, 
and covered the river with a thick sheet of ice. After this he made a heavy 
snow fall, which nearly closed up the entrance of the underground house. 
When Grisly-Bear-Woman awoke, she noticed the snow, went outside, and 
saw everything covered with ice and snow, and no sign of berries or salmon. 
Then she returned to the house, saying, “Coyote has fooled me: 1 will kill

----

632 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
him? She hastened to Coyotes bed, thinking he was still asleep, seized 
what she presumed to be her husband, and commenced to tear it, only to 
find that it was a piece of rotten wood. Being left totally without food, 
Grisly-Bear-Woman soon starved to death.! 
Coyote and the Hunting-Cannidal. 
(Fraser River and North Thompson Divisions.) 
Coyote, while travelling about, met a Cannibal who was hunting. The 
latter said to him, “Come help me hunt deer! There is a band of deer just 
coming around the shoulder of the hill yonder” Coyote looked where the 
Cannibal had pointed, and saw many people travelling along the hillside. 
He said, “These are not deer, they are people” The Cannibal answered, “No, they are deer, and good food. Let us go and drive them. Coyote said, “I tell you, they are not deer. They are people going to visit another 
village.” 
When the Cannibal and Coyote had thus spoken to each other four 
times, Coyote said, “I will show you deer” He stepped up to a tree, took some of the roots, and transformed them into a buck-deer with large antlers. 
Then, after showing the arimal to the Cannibal, he took some of the meat 
and cooked it. Coyote ate some of the meat first, and invited the Cannibal 
to do likewise; but at first he refused, for he was afraid it might poison him. 
At last he ate some, and acknowledged it to be good. Coyote said, “This 
meat is food, flesh of people is not food. Now we will go together, and I 
will show .you how to hunt and kill deer.” 
After hunting for some time, they found a band of deer; and Coyote 
shot one with an arrow, cut it up, and cooked some of the meat. After 
they had eaten their fill, Coyote took the Cannibals sack, which contained 
human flesh, emptied out the contents, and replenished it with venison Then 
Coyote said, “I ordain that henceforth no one shall eat human flesh. There 
shall be no more cannibals in the world. All people shall eat deer-meat.” 
Some say, that, on leaving, he transformed the Cannibal into an owl. 
Coyote and Holxolip? 
Holxolt’p was in the habit of amusing himself with his eyes by throwing 
them up in the air and letting them fall back again into their orbits. When 
doing this, he called out, “Turn around, stick fast!” (Xallxalo’k, xéqx¢'qa!) 
Coyote came along, and, seeing him do this, he thought he would do the 
    
1 Compare the end of this tale with Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 28, 29. = This is the name of a small dark-colored bird which [ was unble to identify. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 633 
same. Taking out his eyes and throwing them up, he called out the same 
words; but his eyes would not fall back into their orbits properly. He tried 
many times; but, even when they did happen to fall back into their proper 
places, they would fall out again. Meanwhile Raven came along, and, seeing 
Coyote throwing up his eyes, he seized them and made off with them. 
Coyote was now completely blind, and said to himself, “What a fool I was 
to attempt doing a thing I knew nothing about! If I could only get some 
bearberries, 1 could make very good eyes of them.” He crawled about on 
the ground, feeling for bearberries, but he could find none. Finally he found 
some rose-bushes, and, taking two rose-berries, he put them in his orbits, and 
was then able to see: but his cyes were now large and red, and he could 
not see as well as formerly.! 
Coyote and Fox. 
Coyote, while travelling about, came to an underground house which was 
inhabited by very small, short people. They were the rock-rabbits! He said to himself, “They are too short for people. I will kill them all and eat 
them” After slaughtering them, he tied all their bodies on a string, and 
carried them over his shoulder. It was very hot, clear weather, so he sought 
the shade of a large yellow pine-tree, where he heated stones, and, digg.ag 
an carth oven, put all the rock-rabbits in to bake? Then he lay down in 
the shade to sleep until they should be cooked. Meanwhile Fox came along, 
and, seeing Coyote asleep, he dug up and took out the contents of the oven, 
and began to eat! He had caten about half the rock-rabbits when Coyote 
awoke, but, fecling too lazy and overcome by the heat to get up, he said 
to Fox, ‘Spare me ten’ The latter never heeded, but kept on cating. 
When Coyote saw there were only ten left, and Fox still continued to eat, 
he said, “Spare me nine” But Fox paid no attention; and, although Coyote 
continued to ask him to spare the rest, Fox continued to eat’ until there was 
only one rock-rabbit left. Coyote was still too lazy to rise: so he said, 
“Spare me half a one” But Fox ate the last one up, and then crawled 
away, having eaten so much that he could hardly walk. 
At last Coyote became energetic enough to rise. Saying to himself, “I 
will kill that fellow” he set out to follow Fox's tracks. Soon he came upon Fox sleeping in the shade of a very thick firtree. Coyote, by his magic, 
made the tree fall on Fox; then he laughed loudly, saying, “I told the 
    
+ Also collected among the Lower Thompson Indians. + Commonly so called in British Columbia, also sometimes called Pika or Rocky Mountain Piks. They are small brown. tilless animals, very plentfol in high mountains of the interior. They live in rock-lides at the base of cliff, and utter a shril, squeaky cry. They often inhabit the tame slides with the hoary marmots. 3 In the same manger as roots are cooked. « For a similar incident of Coyote snd Fox, see Tek, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 203d 71.

----

634 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
tree to fall on him, and now he is dead” The tree was so branchy, however, that it had fallen over Fox without the trunk touching him, for the 
many branches had hindered the trunk from reaching the ground. Soon Fox 
crawled out from underneath the tree and walked away. 
Reaching a place where the wild red-top or ryegrass was very thick 
and tall, he went into the middle of it and lay down to sleep again. Coyote 
followed him, and set fire to the grass all around; but Fox, waking up, set counter-fires around himself, and thus made Coyote’s fire harmless. 
When the fires had died out, Fox went on, and entered a piece of 
country overgrown with reeds, where hares were very numerous. Coyote, 
following, set fire to the reeds, saying, “They will burst, and then Fox's eyes 
will burst also” When the fire spread, the hares ran out in large numbers; and Coyote was so intent clubbing them, that Fox escaped, and was some 
distance away before Coyote noticed him. The latter then said, “Fox, you 
may go. 
Then Coyote travelled on, and came to a place where magpies were very 
numerous. Here he set snares, and, catching many of these birds, he made 
a robe of their skins. He put his robe on and admired it very much, saying, 
“What a beautiful robe 1 have! and how the feathers shine!” Soon afterwards 
he met Fox, who was wearing a robe thickly covered with tail-feathers of 
the golden eagle. Coyote said to himself, “His robe looks better than mine, 
and is much more valuable.” So he offered to exchange robes; but Fox said, 
“How can you expect me to exchange a valuable robe like mine for yours, which is made of only magpieskins? Just as they were about to separate, 
Coyote seized Fox, and, tearing his robe off, went away with it. 
Fox sat down and watched Coyote until he was out of sight. The 
latter, arriving at a lake, took off his magpie robe, and, tearing it to pieces, 
threw it into the water. Then, donning the robe of cagle-feathers, he strutted 
around, admiring himself, and saying, “If a wind would only come, so that | 
could see and admire these feathers as they flutter” Just then Fox caused 
a great wind to come, which blew the robe off Coyote's back, and carried 
it back to himself! Then Coyote went back to the lake to sce if he could 
find his old magpie robe; but the wind had scattered all the picces and the 
feathers, so that only here and there on the surface of the lake could one be 
seen. Coyote was now worse off than at first, and had to travel along naked. 
Story of Coyote and Fox quarrelling. 
Coyote and Fox? lived together. At first they were on good terms 
with each other, but afterwards they had frequent quarrels. One day Coyote   
TA similar incident of & robe is contained + Some say Fox was Coyore's younger brot Uw'mat story. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 635 
attacked Fox, saying he would kill him. The latter ran out over the plains, 
and Coyote after him. He chased Fox until he was out of breath and very 
tired. Then he said to himself, “Fox can run much better than I can: he 
is still quite fresh, and 1 am exhausted. He may turn round and attack me 
when he sees that I am fatigued.” Therefore he made a hole in the ground, 
and crawled into it, for he was afraid. Fox hastened back, and sat down to 
watch the hole. He said to Coyote, “You are exhausted; and if you come 
out, 1 will soon run you down and kill you. I will watch the hole until 
you have to come out” Coyote did not know what to do to induce Fox to 
leave, but at last he hit upon a plan. 
He defecated, and transformed his excrement into many pans, kettles, 
and other food-vessels, with which he rattled, making much noise, as if many 
people were getting their utensils ready hurriedly, preparatory to starting on 
a journey. Then he spoke in a loud voice, as if addressing a concourse of 
people, saying, “We must leave at once. It will take us a good while to 
reach our destination.” 
Then he let his excrement make a noise, as if many people were leaving; 
and he let the noise gradually subside, as if the people were passing out of 
hearing. Fox said to himself, ‘Coyote must have found some people, and is 
going with them to the underground world. They are evidently going to 
feast the people of the underground world” He listened until the last sound 
had died away; then, feeling sure that Coyote had gone, he left. As soon 
as Coyote saw that Fox had left, he came out of the hole, and escaped. 
Story of Coyote's Daughter; or, Coyote's Daughter and her Dogs. 
A man® and his wife lived in an underground house. The wife? was 
not a native of that place, but belonged to a distant country. The couple 
had a son who was just able to walk, and who bothered his parents very 
much by constantly crying to see his grandfather. At last the father became 
tired, and said to his wife, “Go back and visit your people, and take our 
son with you, that he may see his grandparents.’ 
When the woman and her child were ready to depart, he warned his 
wife, saying, “You must be very careful how you go, for there are cannibals * 
in the country through which you will pass. Always keep in the open, and 
never pass through any bushes or groves of trees.” The country was a prairie, 
with clumps of trees and bushes here and there. 
On the fourth day the woman said to herself, “It makes the journey 
much longer having to go around all the clumps of trees on my trail” So,   
1 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 35 et seq. + According to some Indians, a copore. * Most Indians agree that she was the daughter of Coyote. + Some say mysterious beings.

----

636 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
seeing a small patch of trees and bushes just ahead of her, she thought she 
would take a short cut right through them, especially since she could see 
that it was a very small patch surrounded by open prairic. As soon as she 
entered the bush, it spread out on all sides, covering a large area, and, 
travel in whichever direction she would, she found no way out of the forest. 
Toward evening she approached an underground house in the woods. 
The house was inhabited by four women! who invited her to enter. When 
she reached the foot of the ladder, one of the women stepped up and caressed 
and blessed the boy. Then she said to the other, “Build a large fire, that 
the mother may warm her child, for he is very cold” When the fire had 
become very large and hot, they shoved the woman and her son into it, 
and piled up much fuel on top of them. The boy, however, urinated on the 
fire right around where they were, and thus preserved himself and his mother 
from being burned. 
The women added fuel to the fire four times, and, after doing so the 
last time, they went to bed, saying to one another, “They will be nicely cooked 
by the time we rise. We will eat them for breakfast.” 
After the women had fallen asleep, the boy urinated so much on the 
fire that he extinguished it altogether. Finding that the women had blocked the entrance, he urinated against the wall of the house, and thus made a 
hole, through which he and his mother escaped by walking up over the 
stream of urine, and down on the other side. They had just reached the 
open plain when the cannibals awoke, and, finding their victims gone, at once 
gave chase. They ran very fast, and soon overtook the fugitives, who, 
however, saw them coming. Then the woman pulled four hairs out of her body? and threw them 
on the ground. They were at once transformed into four tall trees standing 
close together. In these they took refuge. The cannibals arrived, and at 
once with hammers and. chiscls tried to fell the tree in which the woman 
and her son were. When it was about to fall, the couple sprang into the 
top of the next one. Finally they took refuge in the last tree, and the 
cannibals commenced to chop around the base. Now, the boy began to 
urinate down the tree; and each time he did so, the wood swelled, and the 
notch that the cannibals had cut closed up, as if it had never been cut. 
Thus the cannibals worked hard, but their progress was so slow that it was 
nearly sunset before the tree showed signs of falling. 
Now, the woman's husband had four fierce dogs which he always kept 
tied up near his house. They were Grisly Bear, Rattlesnake, Timber Wolf, 
and Panther” When the dogs knew that their master’s wife was in distress,   
1 Some say & man and his wie. 4 Some say out of her head; others say out of her pubes. * Some say Grily Bear, Ratlesnake, Wolf, and Porcupine.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 637 
they became very restless, and strove to break away. Their master suspected 
that something was wrong, and let them loose. They rushed off, and just 
reached the place as the tree was about to fall. Attacking the cannibals, 
they killed and ate them. 
The woman and her son returned with the dogs to her husband's house, 
and, after resting for four days, started out on her journey again. Taking 
care not to enter any pieces of timber, she reached the house of her father, 
Coyote, without mishap, and she and her son were cordially welcomed. 
Since these dogs killed and ate the cannibals, therefore the grisly bear, 
rattlesnake, wolf, and panther kill people at the present day. Their master 
said to them, ‘Because you have tasted human blood, you will henceforth 
be able to kill men occasionally.” 
Coyote and Salmon 
Some time after Coyote had introduced the salmon, he said, ‘I have 
never given a feast yet. Why should I not feast the people?” He caught 
and dried great numbers of sockeye and king salmon, and also made much 
salmon-oil, and buried much salmonroe. Then he sent out messengers to invite all the people. He said to himself, “I will sing a great song, and 
perform a dance, when the people assemble. They will think me a great man.” 
Then he practised his dance, and sang, going out and in between the poles where the salmon were drying. While doing so, his hair was caught in 
the gills of one of the salmon, and he could not free himself. He got angry. 
pulled the whole fish down, and threw it into the river. Immediately all the salmon came to life, and, jumping off the poles, ran to the river. The 
Coyote tried to stop them, but in vain. As he was endeavoring to catch the 
last one, he noticed that the oil had also come to life, and was running to 
the river. He ran to stop it, but too late. The salmon-roe he had buried 
also came out and jumped into the river. When the people arrived, they 
found nothing to eat, and were very angry, for they thought Coyote had 
played a trick on them. 
Coyote and Wolf. 
Coyote lived with Wolf. They hunted together, and killed many deer 
and elks. Wolf said, “When we kill animals, we should take their skins off 
before eating them. The skins are not good for us to eat. We might leave 
the skins wherever we kill the animal, and the people might find them and 
  
Sec Farcand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 18 of this Volume.

----

638 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
be glad to have them. They might dress the skins and make clothes and 
moccasins of them.” Coyote answered, “No, that would not do. It would take 
too long to skin each animal. We will eat the skin with the flesh.” 
This is the reason that at the present day wolves and coyotes, when 
they kill or find an animal, always cat the skin with the flesh, leaving 
nothing but the bones. If Coyote had been more considerate, and not so 
selfish, but allowed Wolf to have his wish, the people would have been 
better off. 
Story of Coyote and the Swans. 
Coyote, while travelling with his son Kallelist, passed a lake, on the 
grassy shores of which they saw four swans. Coyote sang and danced, and 
thus ‘brought it about that the swans lost their power of flight, and fell a 
prey to his son, who clubbed them, and tied them together. Coyote said to his ‘son, “We will cook and eat them. You must watch them while I gather 
firewood. 1 will cut off the dry top of that tree yonder * Coyote climbed 
the tree, and was standing on a branch, busily engaged cutting the trec-top, 
when his son cried to him, ‘Come quickly, father! The swans have come to life, and I cannot hold them.” Coyote got excited, and cried, “Catch them ! 
Hold them!” As he hurriedly descended the tree, the sharp point of a broken 
limb penetrated his scrotum, and he yelled with pain. Meanwhile the swans 
all got loose and flew away, and, although Coyote danced and sang, they kept on their way, and alighted far out on the lake 
  Coyote and the Black Bears. 
As Coyote was travelling along, he saw three black bears in a tree, — 
a mother and two cubs. He said to himself, “I will kill all three, and make 
their skins into a robe. The two cubs’ skins sewed together will make one 
half of the robe, and the large bear the other half” He took off the robe 
he was wearing, tore it all to pieces, and, taking up a branch that was to 
serve as a club, he hid at the foot of the tree. 
One of the bears came down, and he struck it with the club, but it ran 
away unharmed. The other bears also came down; and, although Coyote 
hit cach of them on the head, they ran off unharmed, and disappeared in the 
timber. Thus Coyote was left without a robe. He picked up the pieces of 
the robe he had torn, but saw that it would be too much work to sew them 
together again, for the bits were very small. He travelled on, wearing only 
his leggings. He was foolish.   
11 have lately collected among the Thompson Indians story similar to this. £ Some say it was the dead pichy top of & yellow pine.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 639 
Coyote and his Niece. 
Coyote and his niece! lived alone in the same house, and slept on opposite sides of the fire. One morning Coyote happened to see her privates, 
and said to her, “Why do you show your privates? Keep them covered. I 
feel strange when I sce them” The woman felt ashamed at what Coyote 
said. The latter thought, “I will play a trick, that I may have intercourse 
with my nieces" for, after seeing her privates, he desired her very much. 
He pretended to be very sick, and said, ‘I am dying. Come here, and 
I will tell you what to do. Take a large spoon made of sheep's-horn, and 
a birch-bark basket, and dig a grave for me. Bury me in the hole you dig, 
just leaving my head uncovered. Then place a basketful of lily-roots (Lilium 
columbianum Hanson), and another one of service-berries, beside my head as 
a graveoffering. 1 shall never eat roots or berries any more, so be liberal 
and place plenty at my grave. Also leave the spoon and bark bucket near 
by, for it would not be right to take these away and use them when they had been once used for digging a grave. Then leave me to rot, and go to 
my brother? who dwells in an underground house away to the south, and 
live with him, for you cannot live here alone. Marry the first nice man that 
comes along and wants you” Bidding his niece good-by, Coyote pretended 
to die, and was buried as directed. 
Then the woman took all her property, travelled to her friends, and 
told them of her uncle's death. After she had departed, Coyote came out 
of the grave, and, taking the bark bucket, he fetched water, and boiled the 
berries and roots together. When they were done, he ate with the spoon, 
and thus he cooked and ate until all the food was consumed. 
Then he travelled until he came near to the place to which his niece 
had gone. Here he went to a shallow lake, and, taking a horse-tail reed, 
he transformed it into a nice-looking bark canoe. He tore alge and other 
plants from the bottom of the lake, and transformed them into many blankets 
of green and yellow colors. He transformed a piece of taxpa'wood * into a 
gun, and some alkaligrass into dentalia, with which he ornamented his 
body. He donned the brightest-colored blanket, painted his face red and. 
black, dressed his hair, and placed two large feathers that looked like an 
eagle's tail-feathers, one on each side of his head, so that they stood up like 
horns. He attached long streamers of red ribbon to their tips. Then, going 
to the river some distance above the people's house, he launched his canoe 
and paddled down-stream. 
  
+ Some say it was his daughter. # Some say fiend. 2 A tree which bears a whitish berry, which the Indians at.

----

640 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
The people saw him approaching, and called to one another, “A richly 
dressed stranger is coming in a canoe!” He had almost passed the people, whose curiosity was aroused by his appearance. They hailed him, asking 
where he was going, and if he had any news. He answered them in the 
Okanagon language, and they said among themselves, “He is an Okanagon,’ 
an invited him to come ashore. He tied up his canoe and entered the 
house. When the girl saw him, she said to herself, “This is surely the man 
my uncle told me about” She shook a mat, and spread it for him to sit 
on. Then he asked the people for the woman, and gave them all his 
dentalia, blankets, gun, and canoe as a marriage-present. That night he 
slept with his niece, and had intercourse with her. Next morning he arose 
before daybreak, and left. 
When the woman awoke, her husband was gone, and the people found 
their rich presents transformed. © The dentalia had become alkali-grass; the 
gun, a stick; the blankets, water-plants; and the canoe, a horsetail. The 
people said, “Oh! this is certainly Coyote. He has played a trick on us” 
The woman was ashamed when she learned that her uncle had lain with her. 
Soon afterwards some of the people saw a man walking up the river 
on the opposite bank, and they all ran out to have a look at him. It was 
Coyote, who called across the river, “If the child is a branch with a hole in 
it, hang it up in a tree; but if it is a branch with a spike on it, then rear 
it” He meant the child his niece would bear to him, as she was already 
pregnant.’ 
Coyote and the Cannibal Boy. 
As Coyote was passing near the house of some people, he saw a boy, whom he captured. He put him on his shoulders and walked away with 
him as fast as he could. Now, Coyote had a small boil or sore at the root 
of his neck, or somewhere between his shoulders; and the boy, seeing it, 
picked the skin off and commenced to probe it. Coyote said, ‘Don’t do 
that! It hurts” But the boy said, “I am only opening the sore to let the 
matter out, so that it may soon get well” Thus the boy opened up the 
sore four times, until it bled and became large; and cach time Coyote 
remonstrated with him, for it was painful. At last he reached home with 
the boy, and the people asked him where he had gotten him, and what he 
intended to do with him. Coyote answered, “Oh! I stole him. When he 
grows, he will do everything for me. He is my slave” The people said, 
“If he belongs to any tribe near by, his friends may attack us, and try to 
get him back” Coyote did not know that the boy was a cannibal’s son. 
  
* This last incident in the story forms part of a Thompson Indian Coyote story.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 641 
That night Coyote made his bed and put the boy in it, covering him 
over with a blanket, and lay down alongside of him. In the same bed, on Coyotes other side, lay a woman with whom he was familiar! Shortly 
after going to bed, Coyote turned his back to the boy, and, laying his head 
on the woman's breast, he soon fell fast asleep. Then the boy put his 
mouth to Coyote's sore and sucked out all his blood and flesh, leaving 
nothing but the bones and skin. The boy swelled out very much, and had 
a thirst for human blood and flesh. Therefore he arose and killed all the 
people, and ate them, excepting one man who happened to wake up, and 
who made his escape. As the boy ate the people, he kept on growing, until, 
by the time he had finished his meal, he had attained the proportions of a 
man of gigantic bulk and enormous weight. Now, following the tracks of 
the man who had escaped, he soon’ began to draw near him. As he ran 
along, he repeatedly uttered the cry, “A'ak!”* and the man, hearing him 
coming, threw earth behind him, thus retarding the cannibal’s progress. 
Four times he retarded him thus, but at last the cannibal came close up to 
him again. 
Then the man hastily made a fire, and, taking a marmot's bone, a 
porcupine’s bone, a wolf's bone, and a grisly bear's bone, he put them into 
the fire. Taking them out again, he sharpened their points, and transformed 
them into four dogs, placing those made of the marmot and porcupine bones 
in front, and the other two a little farther back, while he himself sat down 
behind all. He made the dogs lic down quietly, with their jaws resting on 
their front feet, and leaving enough space for a person to pass between them. 
The cannibal approached, and asked the man to call in his dogs, that he 
might pass. The man answered, “Pass between them: there is plenty of 
room. They are very quict dogs, and have never been known to bite 
anybody The cannibal walked in between them, and, when he had passed 
the first two, all the dogs attacked hii simultancously and tore him to pieces. 
They devoured him, and licked his blood off the ground. Then the man 
returned home, and found Coyote still alive, but in such a weak condition 
that he could not walk. The man hunted deer, killed many, and fed Coyote 
until he regained his flesh and strength, and became quite well again. The 
man and Coyote lived together for a long time. 
The War of the Four Tribes or of the Four Quarters. 
Once in the ancient time, the Crees from the east, the Thompsons from 
the south, and the Lillooet from the west, made up their minds to attack 
Some smy hit wile, = See Tek, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 79. 3 Some say he merely threw earth so that it formed. small mounds and ridges, and that, being soft, it impeded bis walking. Others say he threw the earth behind him. Rolling up the surface, as it were, he threw it behind, and it spread out, making a wide expanse of space, and thus the purser had to cover a great distance.  

----

642 R TIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the Shuswap of the north. They met on the east bank of Fraser River, 
and there joined forces. Numbering several hundred men, they now advanced 
up the river to attack the Shuswap, but, when nearly opposite the mouth or 
Lone Cabin Creek and still some distance from Canoe Creek, they were met 
by Coyote, or some other transformer, who changed them into pillars of clay. 
They may be scen standing there now, — the tall Crees on the right, the 
Thompson of medium height in the centre, and the short Lillooet on the left. 
Origin of the Chilcotin Canon. 
It is said that as recently as about sixty years ago, the falls at the 
mouth of the Chilcotin Cafion were so steep, and the water so rapid, that 
very few salmon were able to ascend, and that before this time they could 
not ascend at all. Thus there were no salmon in the Chilcotin country. 
The falls there have gradually worn down, until at the present time salmon 
ascend freely, and reach spawning-grounds on the Upper Chilcotin River. It 
is further said that the falls in the Chilcotin Cation formed originally a dam 
or barrier of rock, which Coyote placed across the river for the express 
purpose of hindering the salmon from ascending, and thus retaining them 
for the Shuswap.' 
The Ball. 
(The North Thompson division tell this story in the same way as the 
Thompson Indians? Coyote desires a glittering ball owned by some people. 
He and Antelope send their sons to steal it. Coyote's son assumes the 
shape of a stone on the playground, takes it, and is pursued; when almost 
caught, he throws the ball to his brother. All Coyotes children are killed. 
Antelope’s sons reach home with the ball. Coyote is prevented by Antelope 
from throwing himself into the fire; he sleeps four nights with the ball under 
his head, then escapes with it, pursued by Antelope; he makes a fog to 
mislead Antelope; then he breaks the ball, which contains dung; he uses 
pieces of the shell as armor, leaving his throat unprotected, and attacks people 
in the shape of an elk, killing many; finally he is struck by an arrow in 
the throat, falls, and is found to consist of dung.) 
2. OLp-ONe. 
Old-One and the Sweat-House. 
Old-One was travelling over the earth, visiting the people, and putting 
everything to rights. He taught the people how to sweat-bathe and make   
+ Some say this was done because the Chilcotin were a bad people. + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 32-34.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. B 643 
sweathouses. He told them, “When you sweatbathe, pray to Swalu's® that 
you may be healthy, and obtain success in hunting and gambling” Soon 
after this he met Swalu’s, and said to him, ‘Henceforth people will make 
sweat-houses, and, when they sweat-bathe, they will supplicate you, to whom 
the mystery of the sweatbath belongs. When they pray for relief from pain, for health, long life, lightness of body, fleetness of foot, wisdom, wealth, 
and success in hunting, gambling, and war, pay heed to them, and grant 
their desires. Gather their sickness when they are in the sweat-house, take 
it from their bodies, and cast it to the winds." 
Then Old-One visited the Water, and said to him, “When my children 
wash and bathe themselves, draw sickness from their bodies, heal their wounds, 
refresh them and, when they pray to you, answer their supplications. You 
shall be the guardian of those who constantly seek you.” 
Old-One also visited the Fir-Tree, and said to him, “When my children take 
your branches and wash with them, may your mysterious power help them!" 
For this reason the Indians use fir-branches, bathe in the cold water, 
and sweat-bathe at the present day. 
Old-One and the Brothers. 
Once when Old-One, or Chief, was travelling over the earth, he came to a place where four brothers were living. The brothers were about to make a canoe; and that day the eldest had taken some food on his back, and an axe, and had gone into the woods to pick out a good canoe-tree, and to fell it. While wandering around in the woods, he met Old-One, but did not 
recognize him. Old-One told him he was hungry, and asked if he could 
give him something to cat. The man answered, ‘I have nothing to eat myself” They separated; and the man, finding a nice straight tree, felled 
it and then went home. Next morning, when he came to work the tree, he found that it was crooked. This frightened him. He went home and told his brothers what had happened. Then the second brother went out; and he also met Old-One, who asked him where he was going and what he would do. He answered, ‘I am looking for a good tree. I intend to make a canoe” Old-One asked him if he could give him something to eat, for he knew the man carried food in a sack; but the man answered that he had nothing to cat himself. They separated; and the man found a fine straight tree, which he chopped down On the next morning it was bent and twisted in all directions. After this the third brother went out in search of a tree, and the same thing happened to him. :   
+ Swal's is the name of the spirit of the sweathouse, or the deity of the sweat-bath, The name is the same in Shuswap and Thompson, and seems to mean “open face,” or “dace not hidden” (uncovered).

----

644 TELT, THE SHUSWAP. 
At last the youngest brother went out. He was despised by all the 
others. After he had been travelling some time, and when it was about 
noon, he met Old-One in the forest, and was asked the same questions his 
brothers had been asked. He replied that he had a little food, and 
offered the sack with its contents to-Old-One, saying, “You may eat all the 
bag contains. 1 do not care if 1 go hungry myself for a time. 1am young 
and strong, while you are old and weak” Old-One took the bag, emptied 
out its contents, and asked the young man to shut his eyes. When he 
opened them again, the food had increased fourfold,! and, although they both 
ate their fill, they were not able to finish it. Old-One told him to throw 
away what was left. Then Old-One asked the young man for his axe, and, 
telling him to wait where he was, he disappeared in the timber. Soon the young man heard a sound as if many people were working wood. Suddenly 
the sound ceased, and Old-One re-appeared, saying, “Your canoe is finished. Come and look at it” The lad went, and beheld a fine canoe. He thanked 
Old-One for his help. When the latter left, he gave the young man an iron 
axe in place of the one made of stone which he had used before. When the people saw the canoe, they pronounced it the best they had 
ever seen, and they wondered that the inexperienced youth had been able 
to make such a fine craft. The people also wondered at the iron axe, for 
hitherto they had seen those of stone and antler only. The lad's brothers 
despised him no more. Thus he won much by being kind and hospitable. 
3. TLEE'SA AND mis BroTHERs.? 
(Fraser River and North Thompson Divisions.) 
Tisg'sa was the eldest® of four brothers who lived with their aunt 
somewhere near Kamloops. With them also lived a small boy called 
Kwelaa'llst,” who was a grandson of their aunt. The latter was called “mother” 
by them all, and was a woman of profound wisdom. She often bemoaned 
the fact that there were so many evil beings and cannibals in the country, 
thus rendering it hard for the Indians to live, and preventing them from 
increasing. Many of the present-day animals were at that time human beings with animal characteristics; and all of them were cannibals, who used many 
devices to entrap and slay the unwary. Tletsa pondered deeply and long 
  
cessed 10 a great beap, and was changed 10 the very best kind. 2 Compare Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 7 of this volume; Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 42-45; G. M. Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia (Transactions of the ‘Royal Society of Canada, 1801, Section II, pp. 31—33, 35). + Some say, also, that he was shortest of stature (see Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 42). + Some say grandmother. + One Indian said he had heard that Kwelawllst was the offspring of the hog-fenneloot (compare Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbis, p. 31). He is called by the North Thompson “Shuswap Tukemalt or Tokemen'ls.” + Some say it had   
    

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 645 
over the matter, and at last decided that he would try to rid the country of 
these evil beings. Then his “mother.” in her wisdom, looked over the world, and told him 
the names of the several cannibals, and the places where they lived. She also told him the different methods they employed to kill people, and how 
he might conquer them. She only forgot to tell him about Pubescent-Girl 
(the chipmunk). 
Finally Tise'sa, who was gifted with great magic, started out, assisted 
by his three brothers,’ to vanquish the cannibals. They carried no weapons 
with them, Tle&'sa alone having a double-ended arrow-flaker of deer-antler, 
which could also be used as a dagger.! 
First of all, they repaired to the house of the four Grisly Bear sisters 
who possessed arrow-stone. Tlgesa entered the house, and the others waited 
for him outside. By the power of his thoughts he made the women jealous, 
and evilly disposed towards onc another. Then he proposed marriage to 
them, and, calling them aside one after another, he told each that the other 
was talking evil about her. Finally he induced them to fight among 
themselves. As soon as they became angry, their hair fell out, for it consisted 
of arrow-knives and arrow-points loosely set in the skin. When great numbers 
of these had dropped. he gathered them up and gave them to his brothers 
outside. When they had enough, he ordered the women to stop fighting, 
telling them that he had lied to them to make them angry, in order that he 
might obtain arrow-points. They answered, “Why did you do that? If you 
had asked, we would have given you plenty of arrow-stone. It was not 
necessary to make us angry” Then the brothers threw the arrow-heads on 
the ground, saying, “Henceforth arrow-stone and arrow-flakes shall be scattered 
over the whole country, and people will find them in plenty, and use them. 
They shall no longer be in the possession of a few.”* From this point the brothers journeyed toward the place where the four 
cannibal Grisly Bears lived. In the same place lived Coyote and many other 
people Tee's transformed himself into a dog with small arrow-points in place of hair, spear-points for teeth, and a very large arrow:stone knife for 
a til. The brothers led him as they neared the underground house of the 
Grisly Bears. Coyote saw them approach, and called out, “Three men and 
  
© Tiosn was more gifted with magic than bis brothers, and acted a this lender. * Compare the magic stick cared by Lendivtcu in the Chilotin legend (Farrand, Traditions of the Chicotin Indians p. 11 of this volume. Some Indians say his place was on the noxh sie of Kamloops Lake. Others say the story never saed any place in paricala, although the Bonaparte Shuswap and the Thompuon Indians say the incident sappencd. near the Artowntone Hills, an the” ca side of Bonaparte River. Compare this pat of the story with Tei, Traditions of the Thomason River Tndian, . 765 and with Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of Bris Columbia, pe 35. «From this time on, the brothers il carried aromsion knives * In the North Thompson venion, one half of the people were Grisly Bears the ober half, Coyotes In the North Thompson version of his sory, lakementlit ake the place of Tags. - 
   

----

646 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
a dog are coming! That is my dog” When the brothers reached the house, they saw that heaps of human bones were piled up around it. They 
were invited in, tied their dog to the top of the ladder, and entered. The 
people asked them to play a game of hide-and-seek outside. The bark of a 
large tree which stood close by had been scraped off all around by the 
Bears’ claws, and the brothers were told that they would play around the 
tree. Soon the Bears caught the brothers and killed them. Meanwhile 
Coyote had examined the dog, and spit in its face. Once, however, he got 
his face too near, and cut his lips on the dog's hair. Then he said to the 
dog, “You are indeed wonderful.” 
When the people came back, he told them about it; and they said, 
“Let us play with the dog” They then let him loose, and he ran to and 
fro among the Grisly Bear people, killing them with his sharp hair, teeth, 
and tail. Whenever his tail swung round and hit a man, it cut him in two. 
When he had killed them all, he changed back to his former self, went 
to the bodies of his brothers, and jumped over cach of them, thus bringing 
them back to life. Then he said, “Henceforth the grisly bear shall be a 
mere animal, able to kill people only at times when they are foolish. It 
shall no longer live on human flesh, but on roots and berries.” ! 
Continuing their journey, the brothers came to Little Tobacco-Place 
(Pesma’menex),’ near Dead-Man’s Creek, where the poisonous tobacco-tree grew. 
It was a large, very leafy tree, and all around it lay the bones of its victims; 
for any one who touched its leaves, or rested in its shade, invariably died. 
Ties said, “I will smoke tobacco” His brothers tried to dissuade him; 
but he insisted, and, going up to the tree, he cut it down with his arrow- 
flaker. Taking the leaves, he smoked them himself, and gave his brothers 
the stalks to smoke. Then he said, “Tobacco shall never again kill people. 
It will be a good plant, and people shall gather and smoke it without harm.” * 
Continuing their journey, the brothers came to where the Thompson 
River flows out of Kamloops Lake. At this place the river was blocked by 
a huge elk, which stood tail upstream. Everything that floated downstream 
entered the monster's anus, and passed out at its mouth. When a canoe 
with people tried to pass, the former only passed through the elk, which 
devoured the crew. Tls¢'sa said, “I will eat elk-meat.” His brothers answered 
that he must not attack the monster, for he would certainly be killed. He 
insisted, however, and, lying down on a board, he floated down, and entered 
  
  * Compare preceding part of this h ‘Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indias, pp. 30, 31; and with Farrand, Traditions of the Chiotin Indians, p. 13 of this volume. 3 Wild tobacco was plentiful here. * Compare preceding part with Farrand, Traditions of the Chileotin Indians, p. 12 of this volume. In the North Thompson version the tree killed the people by falling on them. When it fell on TIEe'sa, he pat his amow. faker upright, and the tree rested on it «Some say he killed them by pressing his sides in on them. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 647 
the clk. When his brothers saw only the board pass out of the elk’s mouth, 
they said, “Tlg¢sa is certainly dead” Presently, however, they saw the beast 
stagger, and very soon it fell down on the bank dead. They were cutting 
the carcass to find the body of their brother, when he called to them from inside, saying, “Be careful! you may cut me” He had placed his flaker 
crossways inside of the elk, and had then cut off its heart, thus killing it. 
Then Tlss'sa said, “The elk shall no longer have supernatural powers. 
Never again shall it cat people. Henceforth elk shall be hunted and killed 
by the people, who will eat its flesh, and dress its skin.”! 
Continuing their journey, the brothers reached a cliff called (Ox)tseta’ks,’ 
in the Bonaparte Valley. Here dwelt a ram of the mountain-sheep.® which 
killed everybody who passed that way by blowing its breath on them. 
Tigo'sa said, “I will eat sheep-flesh;” and against the wishes of his brothers, 
who feared he would be killed, he went up toward the ram, which blew on 
him, but without effect. Tles'sa ripped up the ram with his arrow-flaker 
and killed it Then he transformed it into a proper mountain-sheep, saying, 
“Henceforth you shall be a common sheep, unable to harm the people, who 
will hunt you, and make use of your flesh and horns.” 
Here Tle#'sa sat down and made a spoen out of one of the ram's horns, 
and his brothers joined him. As they were sitting there, a boy passed by, 
running along on the flat ground underneath them. He was carrying a 
small bundle on his back, and his bow and arrow in his hands. It was 
Kwelagllst, who had been sent out in haste to overtake the brothers, and 
tell them of the mysterious power of Pubescent-Girl, and how to overcome 
her. The brothers did not recognize him; and, although they called to him, 
he did not hear. Then they made up their minds to kill him, and kicked 
down the stones from the cliff on to the flat below, the bowlders falling all around him! When the dust cleared away, they saw him going along 
singing, as if nothing had happened. Four times they kicked down the 
rocks” but with the same result® Then they ran after him, and, when they 
had reached him, recognized him. 
He said to them, “You had better eat of my food. You must be hungry.” 
Taking off his pack, which consisted of a round basket-kettle called selekwa'n, 
and some ska‘metc, hog-fennel, and other roots, he put them in the kettle 
and boiled them with hot stones. When cooked, he placed the food before 
+ Compare the preceding pan with Farrand, Traditions of the Chileon Indians, p. 10 of tis volume; aso with Dawson, Notes on. the Showep People, cic, . $2. Boss, Indisnische Sagen von der od pacifschen Kise 
LE ace i ea Doc. Eglis ranch nd he Indians lim that the forms stone, of  bighorn am and of log basing at i may sill be seen. thre In the North Thompson veion, 8 mountain gost In the North Thompson version, he pus the woven cooking: basket ove bis bead, hus protecting inset Indians say the stones may wll be ten on the fat, where they were Kicked doh. © Compare Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 43; and Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People, etc, p. 31. 
   

----

648 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the brothers. TIg#sa remarked that the kettle was too small, and declared 
he could cat the contents at one spoonful. He helped himself first, and 
filed his large horn spoon, almost emptying the kettle. He turned away to swallow it; but when he turned back, the kettle was just as full as at first. 
Thus they all ate and were satisfied.’ When they had finished, Kwela'llst 
left them without telling his errand, and went home. 
From there the brothers followed up the Bonaparte until they came to 
a place called Skelawa'uux! which is a deep hollow surrounded by cliffs. 
Here dwelt the beaver and its friends, which were noted for their magic. 
They were not cannibals; but at that time people did not know how to kill 
them, and they were considered to be possessed of mysterious powers. 
Tls'sa said he would eat beaverflesh. He made a beaver-spear, and tied a 
strip of white bark around each of his wrists,* that his brothers might see 
him more readily if he were taken under water. Going up to the beaver, he 
harpooned it, and was dragged into the creek. His brothers watched his 
movements under water. but at last lost sight of him. They searched for 
him in all the crecks, and dug trenches® in many places, but without result. 
At last they dug a very deep trench along the main creck, and found him. 
When they dug near to him, he said, ‘Be careful not to hurt me! I am 
here” He had been carried into the beaver's house in the bank, where he 
had finally killed the beaver. Now the brothers killed many beavers, and 
took their skins. They also ate the big beaver's meat, and said, “Henceforth 
beaver shall be speared by people, and their flesh and skins made use of. 
They shall no longer possess mysterious powers.” * 
Continuing their journey, the brothers came to a place near the creek 
called Stony-Hollow (Nxa‘nextem) where the marmot® had a house in the 
rock  Tieg'sa said, “I will eat marmotfleshi’ and his brothers told him he 
would certainly he killed, for no one could enter the marmot's house without 
the top of the entrance crushing him down. On his way to the house, 
Tisw'sa, seeing two of the marmot's little ones, killed them both, and stuck them in his belt. When he entered the house, the rocks shut on him; but 
he placed his flaker vertically in the entrance, and passed inside unharmed. 
Then he transformed the animal into the common marmot of the present 
day, saying, “Henceforth you shall be the common marmot, and shall never 
again be able to kill people, who will usc your flesh and skin." ® 
    
1 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 43; Boss, Sagem, p. 5. © Compare Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 14 of this volume. © This place is a chasm near the old so-nile post on the Caribou Road, « Some say he painted his wrists white. + The Indians say these trenches may be seen in the shape of hollows and vales in the bi © Compare Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 13 of this volume. 7 This place is a litle beyond the old So-mile post (from Lillooet, meationed above (Footnote 3). # In the North Thompson version, the bushotnled rat. + Compare Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin. Indians, p. 12 of this volume; Teit Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 48; and Boas, Sage, p. 1. 
  at this place, 
 

----

TELT, THE SHUSWAP. 649 
From this place the brothers tumed back, descending the Bonaparte 
until they arrived at the mouth of Hat Creek, which they ascended. A little 
distance from the mouth, they arrived at a place called Little-Coming-out- 
Place (Puptpu'tlemten), where, on one side of the trail, there was a smooth rock. Here Tieg'sa said, “Let us amuse ourselves by seeing who can stick 
his head farthest into the rock” The three brothers, one after “another, pressed their heads against the rock, but made only slight impressions. Then Tieg'sa pushed his head against the rock, and it went in to the ears and bridge of the nose. When he pulled his head out again, a red mark was left in the cavity.! 
Continuing their journey, the brothers came to a place at the Marble Catton called Break-Wind-Water-Place (Np&‘atkwaten), where there is a lake. Here lived the skunk, which killed people. Tet'sa said, “I will eat skunk. flesh” and thereupon he transformed the skunk to the present-day animal of that name. Cutting out the bag containing the scent, he emptied it into the lake, thereby changing the color of the water. Then he ordained that never again should the skunk be able to kill people with its secretion? 
Close by here, in a high cliff, lived the cannibal eagle, which swooped down on people, and, picking them up, dashed them against the rock, the base of which was strewn with human bones. Tlze'sa said, “I will have eagle- feathers to decorate myself” Unobserved by his brothers, he put some white paint in one side of his mouth, and red paint in the other. When the eagle 
saw him approach, it swooped down and clutched him, and flew with him 
high up on the cliff, against which it dashed him. Tigg'sa warded off the blow with his flaker, and let the red paint flow out of his mouth. When 
his brothers saw Tles'sa dashed against the rock, they said, “He is dead. 
See his blood!” Again the eagle dashed him against the rock, and he let the white paint flow out of his mouth. Now his brothers said, “He is surely 
dead. See his brains” The eagle, thinking he was dead, placed him on the ledge where its nest was, whereupon Tlgg'sa killed it with his flaker, 
and pulled out its tailfeathers. Then, tying the caglets one to each wrist, 
he commanded them to fly down with him. When they alighted, he pulled 
the large feathers out of their wings and tails, and gave them to his brothers. 
He transformed the cannibal birds into eagles, saying, “Henceforth you shall 
be ordinary eagles without the power of killing people. Your feathers shall 
ornament the heads, clothes, and weapons of men." ® 
Continuing their journey, the brothers came to a place called Hillside   
+ Compare preceding part with Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia, p. 32; with “Tet, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 45; and Bows Suge . 4. #'See Toit, Traditions of the Thompaon River Indians, pp. 45, $9 605 also Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People, tc, p. 35. 3'5ed Dawson, Notes on the Shuswsp People! etc, p. 32; also Tit, Traditions of the Thompeon River Indians, p. 45; Farrand, Traditions of the Child Todians, . 13 of this volume; and Boss, Segen, b 4.

----

650 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
(Kola'ut), on Pavilion Creek, where the cannibal hare lived. The hare always 
reclined on its back, with one knee over the other, and its foot sticking out close to a stick stuck in the ground, on which it had a roast. When any one came along and asked it for food, it told them to help themselves. As 
soon as they reached forward to take the roast, it would strike them with its 
foot, killing them. TIs'sa said, “I will eat hare-meat;” and, approaching, he 
asked for some roast. The hare said, “Take it," and kicked him in the breast 
as he reached for it. The blow had no effect, however, for Tle'sa had put 
on a breastplate of mica before approaching the hare Then he took the 
hare by the foot, and threw it away among some bushes, saying, “Henceforth 
you shall be a harmless, timid hare: and people shall eat your flesh, and 
dress in your skin.” 
Near this place, but on the opposite side of Pavilion Creek, lived a 
woman called Tsakelsxencta, who killed men. Tlggsa said, “I will have 
connection with the woman.” His brothers tried to dissuade him, saying he 
would certainly be killed; but he insisted. In front of her house was a bridge 
formed by the long legs of a bird called sokwa’z? When any one tried to 
cross, he rolled his legs over, and hurled them into the creck. Tles'sa crossed first; and when he was on the middle of the bridge, sokwa’z turned his legs over, trying to throw him into the creek. Tle¥'sa got across, and, going up to the bird, held his flaker above its head, saying, “If you move your legs when the others cross, 1 will kill you” Thus the brothers crossed safely, and they transformed the creature into the sokwa'z-bird which we see at the present day, saying, “Henceforth you shall be a bird with little power, and rarely seen. When a person sees you, a relative will die”® Now Tier'sa went to the house of Tsakelsxenetxa; and she agreed when he said he would have connection with her, for she had teeth in her vagina, which she made close on the penis of any man who tried to have connection with her, thus killing him. Tle¥'sa placed his arrow-flaker across the inside of her vagina, and had connection with her. All his brothers had connection with her after him. Then he transformed Tsakelsxenelxa, saying, “Henceforth you shall be an ordinary woman, and hereafter men will have connection, and women’s vaginz will not bite or kill them.” ¢ 
Then the brothers, following up Fraser River toward High Bar, passed west of Pavilion Mountain, over a high bluff, on the flat top of which they saw a Chipmunk, who was also a pubescent girl. She was dancing, and they stopped to look at her. The brothers tried to transform her, but could not manage it properly. They walked forward, but found their feet getting   
+ In the North Thompson version it is stated that the Hare broke his foot when striking the fst stone that Tiewsa had hidden under his shirt. See also Boas, Sagen, p. 2. 3 Described by the Shuswap as a rare bird having long legs and a bluish body. # See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, pp. 11, 12, of this volume. * bid, pp. 13, 13, of this volume. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 651 
heavy. After afew more steps, they became transformed, and gradually turned to stone where they stood. The Chipmunk girl became changed into stone of a red color, for she was painted red at the time; and the stripes, like those on a chipmunk, may still be seen on her back. The place where she stands is called Lulit. The place where Tlz¥'sa and his brothers stand 
is called Stemmi’x. The former may be seen a little distance to the rear of 
his brothers, for he was behind them when they all became transformed.' 
4. Story oF Ca'wa 
(Fraser River and North Thompson Divisions.) , 
Ca'wa was a man who belonged to Churn Creck, and became possessed of magical powers. He was also very wise and very good. He saw that there were many bad and foolish people on earth, therefore he made up his mind to travel over the world and to enlighten them. He said, “Other people ought to do the same as the Shuswap do. 1 will go and show them what is right.” 
After travelling a long distance, he came to a lake ® where a people lived who caught frogs in fishtraps. Lake-trout were plentiful there; but the people called them frogs, and were afraid to eat them, while they thought that the frogs were fish. They had dried frogs hanging all around their houses; and they had sores around their mouths and fingers from cating frog-meat. Ca'wa made a net, and caught four large trout, which he put on sticks and roasted before the fire. When they were cooked, he ate some, and gave the rest to the people to eat. He said to the people, “This is the proper kind food, and is the real fish. You have been cating frogs, which are bad” 
When the people found that the lake-trout was much better food, they wished to know how to catch them. Then he taught them all the methods of catching fish, and how to make nets, spears, and weirs. He persuaded them to throw away their stores of dried frogs, and then gave the command, “Henceforth the people of this country shall cat no more frogs. They shall cat fish, and catch them in the same manner as the Shuswap do.”   
+ Compare Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 14 of (his volume; Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People, etc, p. 33; Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indisas, p. 43; Boss, Sagen, p. 41. 
  a place on the North Thompson above the Red Trees Reserve, where, on looking over a cif, they saw two Goat girls bathing in the river below. They had their bodies painted red. Lesa drew sway their breaths by drawing in bis own, and they became transformed into two red stones, which may be seen there at the present day. There is a cliff al this place near the river with a rock-lide at the bottom, + Compare Teit, Traditions of the Thompson iver Indias, pp. 20, 44, 45, 96; also known to the Lillooet Utamat, and Chileotin, Ca’wa seems to have occupied somewhat the same rie as the hog-ennel (kwe'la. He ays altruistic in Kis actions. The name is a form of address among the Thompson River and Shuswap ins. Ie means “friend.” He is also called S¥mpes or Stmp by the Fraser River division, Spelkamaléx or, Sa‘momp by the North Thompson division. 2 Some suppose this to have been in the Chilcotin or Carrier country.      

----

652 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
He continued his journey, and came to a country which seemed full of 
graveyards. Here, when people fell asleep, their friends buried them, thinking 
that they were dead. Ca'wa entered a house, where he discovered a man 
asleep. His friends were preparing to bury him. He stopped them, and 
told them that they were doing wrong, as their friend was only asleep. He 
said, “Wait until to-morrow morning, and you will see him come to life 
again.” 
The people obeyed and waited patiently. Shortly after daybreak the 
man stretched himself, yawned, and after a little while arose, apparently the 
same as when he lay down. Ca‘wa said, “To-night all the people will lie 
down and sleep. In the morning they will rise again’ The people tried 
it, and learned that the stranger spoke the truth: so, after that, they fell 
asleep every night and woke up every morning. Then Ca‘wa gave the 
command, “Henceforth people in this country shall sleep during the night, 
and awake in the morning, as the Shuswap do. They shall never again 
bury sleeping people.” 
He went on, and arrived in a country where the people cut open 
pregnant women. On entering a house, he found a man who was sharpening 
a knife which he was going to use presently to cut open his wife. Ca‘wa 
told him to stop, and said he would show them the proper way. Thereupon 
he delivered the woman after the manner of the Shuswap, heated water, 
washed the child, cut and tied the navelstring. Then he rubbed the woman's 
belly, until the afterbirth came away. After showing the woman how to 
suckle the child, he said, “Henceforth in this country men shall no longer 
cut women open. Children shall be born in a natural and proper manner.” 
The people now saw that there was no need of cutting women open when 
about to give birth to children 
Thus Ca'wa travelled all over the world, teaching people and showing 
them how to do things properly. 
On his way home, after leaving the Cree country, he came to a land 
inhabited by Coyote people! Here the men had branches of trees with 
knot-holes in them for their wives? and therefore they had no children. He 
reproved them for their way of living, led a woman into a house where 
there was a man, told them to live together, and showed them how to have 
sexual intercourse. When leaving, he said, “Henceforth in this country, men 
will know women, and never again will men have branches for their wives.” 
After this, Ca'wa returned to Churn Creek, where he lived to be a very old 
man, and was much respected.* 
  
© This is supposed by some to have been the Thompson or the Okanagon country, more probably the former. 2 Some add that the women had hog-fennel roots for their husbands. 3 Several Indians say that in the olden time this story was much longer, as it related. the incidents in every country that Ca'wa visited.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 653 
5. Brier STORIES OF TRANSFORMATIONS. 
Story of the Moon. 
The Moon was a very handsome man, who during the winter travelled 
constantly, camping every night in a different place. He had a wife called 
Wala, and many children! When travelling, the Moon always went ahead, 
and prepared a house (the halo) for his wife and children to camp in. 
Walla always carried her large birch-bark buckets on her back, and her snow- shovel of birch-bark in her hands. She used the shovel for filling her buckets with snow to melt for water, for melted snow was the only water they could get in the winter-time. 
One morning Wa'la said to her husband, “Where are you going to pitch our camp to-night? Where will you prepare a camp for your children?" Several times she asked this question, but the Moon never answered. At last he said pettishly, ‘Camp on my face. His wife took him at his word, and, jumping on his face, stuck there, and he could not get her off. 
Thus the Moon's handsome face became disfigured, and, when he was afterwards transformed into the present moon, he could not shine very brightly. Wala may still be seen on the Moon's face, holding her birch-bark buckets and her snow-shovel. 
Story of the Deer? 
In mythological times the deer was an animal, and never had human 
form. At first people could not kill it, because it was able to jump from 
one mountain-top to another. Neither bow and arrows, nor traps and snare, were of any avail. Then they asked an adolescent girl, who threw her kilt 
at it. She struck it on the side, and this reduced its jumping-powers to 
some extent. Then she threw her apron, which struck it below or behind 
the ribs, and reduced its powers a little more. Again, she threw her breech- 
clout at it, and this reduced its powers still more; but still it could jump out 
of arrow-shot at one spring. At last she threw her paint-bag at it, which 
struck it on the legs. Then it could jump only just as deer do now. After this had been done the people could hunt successfully, and killed deer with bow and arrows. This is the reason that there are mysterious parts inside the deer now. The girl's kilt may be seen as the pleura and diaphragm. Her paint-bag is 
  
! The meaning of the mame Walla seems to be unknown. Some say the children were the stars and afterwards. the whole family were translormed, thus making the present moon and stars (see Telt, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 91). + See Tet, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 515 known alo to the Lilloet.

----

654 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
now a muscle on the legs; her breechclout is the pericardium; and her 
apron is the meat below or behind the ribs.! 
Story of Owl and Chipmunk? 
Chipmunk lived with his grandfather, Owl. One day they went out 
together to eat and gather bearberries. While thus engaged, Chipmunk 
sudddenly said to his grandfather, “Your scrotum has many lines, and is 
much wrinkled” Owl looked up, saying, “What is that you said” Chipmunk 
gave a little laugh, and answered, ‘I said these bearberries have many lines 
on them, and are much wrinkled” Owl turned away, and was picking berries 
again when Chipmunk said, ‘How wrinkled your scrotum is!” Owl asked 
him savagely what he said; and Chipmunk answered, “That was a slip of 
the tongue. | meant to say that the berries were much wrinkled” Thus 
four times Chipmunk said the same thing. The last time Owl got angry, 
and attacked Chipmunk, who had just time to get into a hole as Owl's hand 
scratched his back, leaving deep marks along both sides of his backbone. 
This is the reason the chipmunk at the present day has stripes extending 
along its back. These are the marks of the owl's claws where it scratched it 
before the chipmunk made its escape. 
The Little Chief Hare. 
The Rock-Rabbit (skrkel), or Little Chief Hare, was one of the myth 
people noted for his industry and pride. One fall none of the people had put 
up any supplies for winter, while he had laid by a great store. He said to 
them, “Why do you waste your time playing games and amusing yourselves? 
Why not work and lay up food for the winter? Soon you will be hungry 
when winter sets in. Look at me! Fall is not yet gone, and I have got 
plenty to last me until spring” He had worked so hard that all his robe 
was torn, only a piece around his backside remaining. He was a person 
very fond of hearing his own name, and anxious that people should notice 
him. He always called out, “Ski kel!” to attract people's attention and to 
please himself. He does this still at the present day. 
Beaver and Porcupine. 
Beaver and Porcupine lived together. They used to eat together; but 
Beaver became dissatisfied because Porcupine always ate Beaver's share in   
+ These several parts of the deer are so named. 2 See eit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 61. * Some say he had worked so hard, that, with constant bending down and the friction of his robe, his til bad become worn quite short, and that is the reason he has such a short tail at the preseat day.  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 655 
preference to his own. Beaver said, “Henceforth we shall eat apart. So at 
mealtimes he took his own food, and sat down some distance away to eat 
it, leaving Porcupine to eat by himself. Porcupine, however, would always leave his own food, and, going to Beaver, would eat his. 
Then Beaver determined to get rid of Porcupine. He said to him, 
“To-morrow we will move camp to the mountains, where there is an abundance 
of food” They packed their household goods, and, after travelling some time, they reached the mountains, where they camped. The following morning 
Beaver said to his friend, “You will find much food to eat here. Iam going 
hunting, but shall return very soon.” When he had gone some distance, he 
stopped and transformed Porcupine, saying, “Henceforth you shall be a common 
porcupine, and shall always inhabit the mountains. You shall never again 
live with Beaver, nor steal his food, neither shall you ever live in a good 
country” Beaver continued his journey, and took up his abode in a flat, 
swampy country with numerous lakes, where he lived alone. This is why 
beavers prefer that kind of country at the present day, and also why 
porcupines inhabit the forests of the mountains. 
Story of Grasshopper." . 
Grasshopper lived with the people who were busy catching and curing 
salmon. They said to him, “Come help us. It is the salmon season. We 
must all work, that we may have a plentiful store of salmon for the winter.” 
Grasshopper answered, “No, I do not like to work. 1 like to amuse myself 
playing, jumping, and making a noise. I do not need salmon. I like to 
eat grass, of which there is great plenty all around here” Soon winter came, 
and the grass was all covered deep with snow. Then Grasshopper was cold 
and hungry. Finding nothing to eat, and being in a starving condition, he 
begged the people to give him some dried salmon. This they refused to 
do, telling him to go and play, and cat grass. When he was nearly dead, 
they transformed him, saying, ‘Henceforth you shall be the grasshopper 
(tekata’ka), and, as you were too lazy and thoughtless to catch salmon, you 
shall live on grass, and spend your time jumping around and making much 
noise.” 
Story of the One Bound and Grasshopper. 
A man who was very quarrclsome, and of a violent temper, frequently 
annoyed the people, who were in the habit of binding him hand and foot 
when he became too obstreperous, and placing him outside the house.   
1A variety of grasshopper called tekata’ka. 3 Some say the people did not transform him, but allowed him to die of starvation (sce sop).

----

656 TEIT, THE. SHUSWAP. 
One day he was thus lying bound when Grasshopper came along, and, 
seeing that he was tied, kicked him. He kicked hard, and his leg fell off Getting angry, he kicked him again with his other foot, which fell off also. 
Then Grasshopper went to the chief of the people and made complaint 
against the man, saying, “He knocked off my legs” The chief was inclined 
to believe Grasshopper's story, for he knew the violent disposition of the 
man: so he gathered the people together to make inquiry, and told them to 
bring the man before him. The man, when questioned, said, ‘Grasshopper 
kicked me twice, and his legs fell off. I could not touch him because I was 
bound hand and foot” It was proved by the people that the one bound 
had told the truth, and that Grasshopper had lied: so they transformed the 
latter, saying, “Henceforth you shall be a grasshopper, and shall kick no one. 
Your legs shall be loosely fastened to your body, and shall come off casily. 
People shall use you for bait to catch fish.” 
Story of Tsowd'una 
The Salmon were about to leave their country on their annual run to the interior, and Tsowa’una begged to be allowed to accompany them. They said to him, “No, you cannot go. The journey is very long and hard, and the dangers are great. You could not possibly stand the hard work." Tsowa'una answered, ‘Never fear! Iam quite able to take care of myself, and, although I am small, I can sand much hardship. I wish to see the country you visit every year, and to gaze at the leaves of the trees as I go along” The other Salmon then said, “We will let you go with us this year, and occasionally in other years, so that you may amuse and enjoy yourself by gazing at the leaves of the trees and other strange scenery on our route.’ For this reason, and since that time, the Tsowa'una occasionally run with the big salmon. 
Story of Bighorn-Sheep and his Wives. 
Bighorn-Ram had two wives, — Bighorn-Ewe and Mountain-Goat. The 
wives were very jealous of each other, for each thought her husband paid 
more attention to the other, and loved her more. At last their jealousy led 
to a quarrel, and they fought each other. The Ewe got the better of the 
Goat. The Ram did not interfere, but let them fight it out. Then the Goat 
took all her goods and belongings, and left the house, saying to the Ewe, 
‘I am leaving. You can have the Ram. He has an ugly nose, big lumps 
  
I This is the name spplied to a small variety of salmon that run some years in considerable numbers up Fraser River with the other salmon. 1 think they are young king-salmon.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 657 
behind his ears, and a large occiput; in fact, he is as ugly as yourself. I 
will seek another husband who is better-looking” The Goat went down a 
steep rock, where she made her home and lived by herself. Afterward she married the He.Goat. 
Before that time, Sheep and Goats had always lived together and 
intermarried; but thenceforth, although often inhabiting the same tracts of 
country, they lived separately, and never intermarried. The Sheep and Goat 
families had different houses. 
The Woman and the Pelicans. 
A Shuswap woman saw a large flock of pelicans flying overhead. It 
was springtime, and they were on their passage north. She said, “I wish I 
were one of those birds, and that 1 could fly as they do!” Then she whistled, 
and called to them, “Take me with you, pelicans!” When the birds heard 
her, the whole flock came down, and, as they reached the height of the tree- 
tops, the wind caused by the flapping of their wings was so strong that it 
took the woman off her feet. 
First she tried to resist, and clung to the lower branches of the trees; 
but as the flock gathered ‘around her, she could hold on no longer, and was 
carried away by them, ascending as with a whirlwind. Thenceforth she staid 
with the pelicans, and, marrying one of them, became as one of themselves. 
She never learned to fly quite as fast as her friends, however; and she may 
be seen every year on her way north, flying behind the others, accompanied 
by her husband and children? When people whistle at them as they fly 
overhead, the whole flock stop and circle around, or drop down to a lower 
level and fly along in this way for some distance. 
Story of the Women and Muskrat. 
Two women lived in a lodge close to the edge of the water. One day 
Muskrat was standing in the water close by when he heard one woman say 
to the other, “Hand me that fish, so that I may put it on a stick and roast 
it before the fire” The woman handed the carcass of a marmot * over to her 
friend. Then Muskrat laughed loudly at the women, and cried out to them, 
“That is not a fish: that is a red marmot” This made the women very 
angry, and they chased Muskrat away.* 
  
1 Some say cranes. * The two or three lone pelicans that sways fy behind the main body are said to be this woman and her husband. They are generally called “the man and. his wife,” or “the woman and her husband.” + The common or red marmot. « Some say they transformed the muskrat others think this is only & fragment of & story.

----

658 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Story of Porcupine. 
A large number of people lived together at one place. Their chief was 
Swan! At another place — distant a long day's journey, and beyond a 
high range of mountains — lived another band of people, who were sometimes 
called the Deer People? They consisted of the Deer, Caribou, Moose, Goat, 
Sheep, and others, and their chief was the Elk! The two groups of people 
had been enemies for a long time. Each tried to interfere with the other, 
and to make their means of procuring a living as difficult as possible. Each 
people had a different kind of government, and lived and worked differently. 
What one did well, the other did badly. The birds acted in some ways like 
mammals, and the mammals like birds. The Swan wished to remedy the 
defects of both parties, and to enable them to live without mutual interference. 
He believed that their troubles all arose from ignorance. 
One day in the wintertime, when the snow lay very decp on the 
mountains, he assembled his people, and, after explaining to them his plans, 
asked if any one of them would carry his message of invitation to Elk. 
Whoever would undertake the journey was to receive a large present of 
dentalia. 
Coyote volunteered to go, and prepared for the journey by putting on his finest clothes, embroidered moccasins, and all his dentalia and necklaces. 
At dusk he left the house, but, not caring to face the deep snow, he ran 
around the underground house all night, admiring himself, and was still 
running in the morning, when the people awoke. The Swan asked him why 
he had not gone; and Coyote answered, I was just playing and running 
around for practice. 1 will start to-night” When evening came, the people 
saw him leave, and watched him until he was out of sight. Coyote soon found the snow too deep, returned after dark, and lay down underncath the 
top of the ladder, where he fell asleep. When the people awoke in the 
morning, they found him fast asleep, and Swan asked him why he had not 
gone. Coyote answered, “Oh! I was playing, became tired, and lay down to 
sleep. 1 will start to-night.” 
Then Swan asked the people which one of them was best able to 
undertake the journcy, and they all agreed that Porcupine -was the fittest 
person, for he was accustomed to walking in the high mountains where there 
was much deep snow. Porcupine was thus selected, and after sewing his 
moccasins all night, and dressing himself warmly, he left at daybreak. When   
+ The Swan was noted for his goodness and wisdom. 4 The emaller animals and birds all Hived together. The other community consisted of all the large animals, but, according to some, was composed of game-animals only (therefore called Deer People), — all the varieties of big game hunted by the Indians and wed 3s food, including the Bufo, Antelope, etc. It seems, according to some, that the Bears were not included. 3 The Elk was a great chief, bat, according to some, was inclined to be thick headed. or stupid at times.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 659 
Coyote saw him leave, he laughed, and said, “When even I could not go, 
how can such a poor, slow, short-legged creature be able to travel through 
the deep snow? That night Porcupine reached EIK’s house in an exhausted 
condition, and all covered with ice and snow. After warming himself, he 
delivered his message to Elk, and asked for sinew and awl with which to 
sew his moccasins. After he had done so, he left for home, bearing Elks 
reply, who promised to visit Swan on the following morning together with all 
his people. 
When Elk and his people arrived, Swan feasted them; and, when the 
feast was over, he and all his people knelt down before Elk, and Swan 
related to him all he knew of the affairs of both people, and told him in 
what way he thought they did wrong. Thus he gave Elk all his knowledge and all his advice. 
Then Elk and his people all knelt down before Swan, and Elk gave 
him all his ideas and knowledge. Thus each people gained full knowledge 
of the other, and together became able to devise means for doing what was 
right. After this they lived much easier and happier than before, and the 
methods of one party did not come into conflict with those of the other. The laws made at the council are those which govern animals and birds 
at the present day. Porcupine got his rich present of dentalia, and was 
much envied by Coyote." 
6. STorY OF RED-NoSE AND THE WOODPECKERS, INCLUDING THE 
Tale oF BLuejay aNp Tera’~a? 
In ancient times red was a color possessed by an old man called Red- Nose (Teekwa'ks)? and no one else in the world had anything of a red color. The birds which at the present day have red in their plumage had no such brilliant feathers at that time. Red-Nose lived by fishing, and owned two very valuable things which the people envied him greatly. These were his magic two-pronged spearhead, which never missed fish, and his wonderful robe (or cloak) of fish-skin, which was fringed with red feathers and ornamented with rosettes of red down arranged over it like stars. Although offered many valuable presents for his robe, he could not be induced to part with it, but kept it hanging above his bed, seldom using it except on special occasions. Red-Nose had a wife who always staid at home, and a grandson who accompanied him whenever he went fishing. The lad always speared the fish, and his grandfather would sit by and tell him the proper fish to spear.   
} A similar tradition is (01d. by the Lillooet (see also for the last remark, Tet, Traditions of the Thompson River Indias, p. 83). + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 43; Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, P. 11 of this volume; Boas, Sagen, p. 13; also the end of the tales in Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia, p. 36. +I is not known whether there was any particalar bird or animal called by this name.

----

660 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Now, the Red-Headed Woodpecker (Ceophlaus pileatus), Teokqa'in, was a great man among the people in those days, and he gathered all the young men’ together, saying to them, “We will make war upon Red-Nose, and obtain his beautiful robe” They started, each carrying a sharp knife, and soon arrived at the river where Red-Nose and his grandson were fishing. Here Woodpecker stated his plans, saying, “We will transform ourselves into fishes, and will each in turn swim past the place where they are fishing. The first onc of us whom the lad spears shall steal the spear-head” First the small red-bird* swam up; and the lad spoke to his grandfather, saying, ‘A strange fish is swimming towards us. Shall I spear it? But the old man answered, “No, let it pass. It is too small and too red-colored to be 
good.” Now, all the Birds passed by them in fish form, one after another, and 
lastly Woodpecker himself. When he appeared, Red-Nose told the lad to spear him. The boy hit the fish and threw it into the stone corral built on the bank of the river to hold fish; but while he was turning around to reach 
for his fish-club, Woodpecker pulled out his knife, and, ater severing the string which held the spearhead to the handle, he jumped into the river with it. The lad cried, “See the fish go off with the spear-head!” and when Red-Nose saw that his valuable spear-head had been lost, he felt so sorrowful that he went home and lay down in bed, covered himself up, and would neither speak nor eat. Now all the Birds swam downstream, went ashore, and assumed their natural forms. Soon Woodpecker joined them, and they dressed his wounds. 
On the second day they all went to Red-Noses house. His wife said, “Many men are coming from the south. Get up and meet them.” But he paid no attention, nor would he move. Shortly the Birds arrived; and Red-Nose's wife greeted them, and asked them whither they were bound. They said, “We are just wandering around; but what is the matter with Red-Nose? Is he sick? The woman answered, “Yes. He is full of sorrow, and has not eaten for two days. A fish took away his valuable spearhead” Woodpecker said, “My young men, when travelling up the river, saw a dead fish with a spearhead in it, and took it away. I believe it may be the same” When Woodpecker heard this, he jumped up, and, looking at the spearhead, said, “Yes, it is mine. I thank you” Woodpecker said, ‘It is not mine. 1 cannot give it to you. It belongs to my young men, and they will not return so valuable a thing for nothing” Red-Nose offered a rich present for it, but the Birds would not accept it. Then he proposed one thing after another, until he had offered everything he possessed, excepting the robe.   
These were only the birds which now have red in their plumage. 3 A small bird almost entirely red.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 661 
Woodpecker said, “My young men have taken a fancy to your robe, 
and unless you give it to them you cannot have your spear-head.” At last 
Red-Nose gave them the robe, saying, ‘Of the two things, my spear-head is 
more. valuable, for I live by it” The Birds departed; and when they had 
gone some distance, Woodpecker called a halt, and they all sat down. He 
said, “I will keep the robe and one of the largest red-down stars on it. You 
may take off the other spots of down, and all the red-feather fringes, and 
divide them among you” Woodpecker put on the dark fisher-robe, and stuck 
the red down on his head. That is the reason why the woodpecker has a 
dark body and a red head. The other Birds put more or less of the red 
feathers and down on their heads, necks, breasts, arms, and other parts of 
their bodies, each one according to fancy. That is the reason why all the 
birds which accompanied Woodpecker have now red feathers. If they had 
not managed to get the robe, and decorate themselves with the feathers from 
it, there would be no red-plumaged birds at the present day. 
Then the party continued their march, and reached a small lake, where 
they fell in with Blucjay, who was on a warexpedition. Blucjay's scouts 
reported to him that people were approaching who were decorated with red, 
and appeared like trees on fire, or like walking stars. Their bodies were as 
if covered with fiery spots. Bluejay prepared for battle, and, followed by his 
men, went out and challenged them. Woodpecker shouted, “We are your 
friends! 1 am Woodpecker.” Bluejay's party were surprised when they 
learned how their friends had obtained the red. 
The two parties travelled together until they came to a spring above 
the lake where Tela'na' lived. The latter had gone down to the edge of 
the lake, where he now lay sleeping in the sun, — a huge, shapeless 
monster. Bluejay said, “I will kill him; but the others said, “Do not attempt 
it. He has great powers” Never heeding, Bluejay stripped the white inside 
bark off of some willow-trees, and tied a piece around each of his ankles and 
wrists, that his friends might be better able to see him when under water. 
‘Walking up to the monster, he thrust his spear into him with all his might. 
Telana arose, and, rolling over, dragged Bluejay, who was still holding on 
to his spear, into the water, where both went down together. The warriors 
watched for a long time, and at last saw the white anklets and wristlets of 
Blucjay disappear underneath a steep cliff which overhung the lake. This 
was known to be the stronghold of Tela'na; and to it he repaired when the 
weather got too hot and dry, and the bogs and springs which were his usual 
haunts dried up. 
The Birds waited a long time, but, seeing no signs of Bluejay, they 
  
! Tela'na soems to be the name of the “bog-mystery,” a sort of spirit which is part of or frequents bogs, muskegs, and wel, miry ground. According to Bows, the name of this monster among the Kamloops people Is Okslmunsluz.

----

662 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
came to the conclusion that he was a prisoner in Tela'na’s house. They said, “We will help him. We will try to break the house” All the Birds 
went to the cliff, and each in turn struck the rock four times with his beak. 
The first ones made no impression, but eventually some of them made a 
small depression in the rock, which those following gradually made deeper. 
At last the Woodpeckers’ turn came, the smaller of whom enlarged the hole 
considerably. Then Sap-Sucker (Teekwo'kicks’) made the hole quite large; 
and Red-breasted Woodpecker (Tcekwa'ken 2), following, made it still larger. 
Flicker (Tcektcekwa'sp®) then struck the rock, breaking it further. Woodpecker, 
then stepping up, said, ‘I am Woodpecker,’ and, striking the rock, split it 
badly. With the next blow he split it still more; and on striking the fourth 
time, the cliff split in two, leaving a large, deep rent. Looking down the 
hole, the Birds saw Bluejay lying on his back, smoking his pipe, and by his 
side the dead form of Telana with the spear in his body. Blucjay pulled 
out his spear, and held up the buttend, of which the Birds took hold and 
thus pulled him out. Both parties then journeyed home without further 
adventure. 
7. STORY OF BLUEIAV; OR, WAR BETWEEN THE BiRps AND MaMMALs.! 
There had been continued wars between the Birds and Mammals. The 
last warexpedition had been made by the Mammals, and many Birds had 
been slain. Now Blucjay, who was war chief of the Birds, proposed that 
they should take revenge. His captains were Willow-Grouse, Chickadee, and 
Snow-Bird, — all great warriors, and relatives of his own. After having 
assembled all the men, they put feathers on their heads and danced the 
wardance. They travelled three days, Chickadee carrying the rations, and 
distributing them among the warriors every night. On the fourth day they 
came ta a large lake with a river running into it. Here they saw a ‘water 
mystery” of great size lying on the edge of the water, sunning itself. Blucjay 
tied strips of the white inner bark of the willow-tree around his wrists and 
ankles, and attacked the monster with his spear. They fought, and Blucjay 
was dragged under water, his followers watching the white strips on his 
wrists and ankles until they disappeared. They waited a considerable time; 
and when he did not re-appear, they concluded that he was dead. 
They left, and travelled up the river.® Suddenly they heard him singing 
a song of victory on the opposite bank. Four times they heard him sing, 
but could not locate the exact spot whence the sound came. At last Chickadee 
saw him, pointed him out, and said, “Don’t you see him? They all looked, 
  
1 A variety of woodpecker, probably the red-naped sap-sucker (Sphyrapicus varius muchals). + The red-breasted woodpecker, probably Sphyragicus ruler. 3 The red-shafted ficker (Colaptes cafer) 4 Also known to the Utk'mat. + Some sy in search of Blucjay.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 663 
and saw him standing there, holding the monster's scalp by the hair, and singing. When they crossed the river and joined him, he put the scalp on 
his head. It had very long hair done up in a topknot. For this reason 
the bluejay has a very large crest at the present day. 
They went on, and after two days reached the village of their enemies, 
whom they attacked and killed. Since no more traces of people were found 
in that country, the Birds concluded that they had exterminated their enemies, 
and started on their way home. When they reached a great plain with 
clumps of trees here and there, Chickadee said he saw a great cloud of dust. 
After he had repeated his remark four times, the people also saw the cloud 
of dust, which was approaching them. Chickadee said. “As there is no wind 
to-day, the dust must be due fo our enemies who arc pursuing us” Bluejay 
also believed that a large party of enemies were coming, and said, “Well, 
we can die here as well as anywhere else.” 
At his direction they hurried to the nearest timbered side-hill, and lay 
in ambush on both sides of the trail. The Mammals came along; and, when 
fairly inside the ambush, Willow-Grouse’s and Chickadee’s men attacked them 
in front, and Bluejay's and Snow-Bird's warriors from behind. Now there 
was a great battle, and all the Birds and Mammals were slain, excepting ten 
of the latter, and Bluejay, who was wounded. Bluejay ran down the hill on 
to the plain, where he sought refuge in the scattered clumps of trees. The 
ten Mammals followed him, and drove him from one clump of trees to 
another. At last he was sorely wounded, and cried out, ‘If only another 
great warrior like myself would help me” Immediately another Blucjay 
appeared, and attacked the enemy, who were very tired. 
Then Blucjay regained strength and courage when he saw that he had 
a helper, and the two attacked the Mammals so fiercely that they killed them 
all. Then Blucjay thanked his helper, and jumped over all the bodies of 
the Birds; and they came to life, and went home without further adventure. 
8. Story oF WOODPECKER'S MARRIAGE; OR, BLUEJAY'S REVENGE. 
Blucjay was the greatest warrior and war chief of the myth people. 
No one dared to disobey him. For many years he had carried on wars 
with the Hoary-Marmots and the Antelopes; but for a number of years 
there had been peace between them, and Bluejay had almost forgotten to 
look upon them as enemies. 
One day he addressed his people, saying, “There will be final peace 
between us and the Antelopes and Marmots. My heart feels soft toward 
our enemies, and our peace shall be sealed by intermarriage. Woodpecker (Teokqa'in?), who is greatest of my people, shall marry one of their daughters. 
The rob beaded wosdiecker, probaly Cophiens peat  

----

664 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Antelope and Marmot are both wealthy chiefs, and each of them has a 
daughter fair and good. — Go, Woodpecker, and obtain one of them. 
Flicker (Teoktceqwa’sp?), Red-breasted Woodpecker (Tcckwa’ken?), and Sap- 
Sucker (Teekwo'kieks ¥) will accompany you.” 
The four Woodpeckers departed, and, upon nearing their destination, 
came to a camp composed of many old people, one man of whom asked 
them where they were going. They answered, “Nowhere in particular. We 
are just sceing the country.” The old man said, “Young men do not generally 
travel to see the country, but to see women. You are going to ask for the chiefs’ daughters. Well, you may get them, for their parents will not give 
them to any of their own people, but are keeping them until some rich 
strangers happen along.” 
Continuing their journey, the Woodpeckers came to a great open plain, 
where Antelope lived in an underground house. Near by, on a knoll, was 
the house of Hoary-Marmot. Believing the latter to be the wealthier of the 
two chiefs, they went to his house first. Marmot entertained them hospitably, 
and, when night came, spread marmot robes for them to sleep on. They 
lay all together, and, when cvery one else seemed to be asleep, Woodpecker 
(Teokqa'in) arose, and, crawling over to where the chief's daughter lay, he 
asked her if she would become his wife. She assented, and on the next 
morning told her parents that the chief of the strangers had lain on her 
robe. The parents agreed to the marriage, saying they were glad to be 
connected with the people of such a great chief as Bluejay. Marmot gave 
them many marriage-presents; and on the fourth day Woodpecker left, taking 
the bride and presents with him. 
When they neared home, Coyote, who was on watch, saw them 
approaching, and called out, “Four men are coming with one woman!” Then 
Blucjay prepared a place for the bride, and welcomed her as though he were 
her father-in-law. 
Some time afterward Bluejay said that the couple should pay a return 
visit: so he sent the Woodpeckers and others of his men to act as the body- 
guard of the bride and bridegroom, and many slaves to carry the presents 
he gave to Marmot and his people. Woodpecker (Tcokqa'in) staid with Marmot until his wife had borne him two children, when he returned again 
to his tribe. Coyote saw them coming, and called out, “A man, a woman, and two children are drawing near” Bluejay was glad to see them, and 
welcomed the children, caressing them as if he were their grandfather. Then 
they staid a long time with Bluejay, and the children grew large. 
  
The redahaled ficker (Copies cofer). + The red-breasted woodpecker, probably Sphyrapicus ruber. + probably the rdnaped spesucker, 8 variety of woodpecker with yellow head and dark body; acconding 1o others, yellow. bellied with red on the head, probably Sphyrapicus varius muchali.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 665 
At last the woman said she would like to visit her people again. There- 
fore Bluejay sent many men to escort them, and slaves to carry the presents. When they were departing, he said to the Woodpeckers, “You may stay 
some time with the Marmot and Antelope people, and play games with them 
until you are tired; but none of you must marry their women.” Now, the 
party staid a long time, and, when about to return home, Flicker (Tcoktceqwa'sp) 
married Antelope’s daughter. When Coyote saw the party approaching, he 
called out, “Many men are coming, accompanied by two women and two 
children” When Bluejay heard this, he took to his bed, covered himself 
with his robe, and would not speak. When the party arrived, Woodpeckers 
(Teokqa'in) children ran to play with him, but he took no notice of them. 
At last Blucjay arose and addressed his people, saying, ‘Flicker 
(Teoktceqwa’sp) disobeyed me, and my heart became so sad that I cried. I 
cannot weep for nothing." When my tears came, I remembered my enemies, 
and my heart has now grown hard. Tomorrow we will go to attack them.” 
Bluejay painted and dressed himself for war; and all his men went with him, 
including Woodpecker (Tcokqa'in) and Flicker (Tcoktceqwa’sp), for they dared 
not refuse. They attacked the Marmot and Antelope people, slaying them 
nearly all? “Now,” said Bluejay, “I have wiped away my tears.” 
9. Story oF TaLxa'NA® 
(Zaxteinemux.) 
A creature ® lived in a lake near Green Lake (Telzenten). His name 
was Talsa'na, and his house was situated in the middle of the lake. He travelled around the country, endeavoring to catch people, whom he took to 
the middle of the lake and drowned. He did not eat the bodies, for he 
was not a cannibal. The people in some parts of the country had been 
nearly exterminated by him, and they were all much afraid of him. One 
community had suffered severely, nearly half of their number having been 
killed or taken away. Among those who remained were four brothers, who 
were all very clever, could talk many languages, and were great warriors. 
The eldest one was Bluejay; and his brothers were Black-headed or Pine 
Jay, Robin, and Owl® Blucjay felt very angry because of the destruction 
of his people, and was burning to have revenge. One morning early the 
war-spirit came over him, and he donned his cuirass, and painted and decorated 
himself for war. Then he. danced the war-dance, and sang his war-song.   
+ Some add, “Women's tears may flow for nothing, for oft about little they weep; but the tears of 8 man and a warrior require some recompense. It is not exsy for him to weep.” # Some tay externinated them. * Also called Salona nd Telswntk. The name seems to mean “railing” or “hanging belly.” 4 Some say he was the otter, while others say he was a “water-mystery” somewhat resembling an otter, + A certain variety of owl that cries principally in the daytime,

----

666 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
He awoke his brothers, one after another, saying, “Do you not remember 
Talsa'na’s deeds? Do you forget that he has killed many of us? Let us go 
and fight him. We may as well be killed by him in battle as slaughtered by him near our houses sooner or later. Let us revenge our kindred.” They 
went on the warpath, and next day reached a hill which overlooked the 
lake in which Talsa'na had his house. Then Bluejay said, “You shall 
watch from here, and I will go and fight him alone. He comes out on the 
bank to slide, and plays in the water just after the sun rises, and does the 
same at evening. 1 will go and wait by his slide, and attack him at evening.” 
The brothers said, “Rather go in the morning, that we may see you more 
clearly” and he agreed. Then Bluejay told them to gather maple-bark. 
They cut the bark into strips, and wound it all around his body, leaving 
only his eyes and mouth visible. He left his bow and arrows with his 
brothers, and attacked Talya'na, armed with a sharp horn dagger, and a war- 
club! attached to cach wrist. Unbeknown to his brothers, he had put red 
paint in one side of his mouth, and white paint in the other. On reaching 
the slide, he hid in a hole in the ground near by, and watched for Talxa'na. 
Soon he arrived, and commenced to slide into the water, when he dived. 
Talga'na slid into the water three times. As soon as he dived, Blucjay 
jumped out of the hole, ran to the slide, and lay down in the middle of it. 
Talya'na came ashore to slide for the fourth time. When he reached the 
top of his sliding-place, he saw something lying about halfway down, and 
said to himself, “There is some bark: 1 wonder how it got there. 1 will 
brush it away when I slide down” He slid right down on top of Blucjay, 
who at once seized him and stabbed him. Now Talsa'na fought; and they 
rolled down the slide together into the water, where they sank. 
They continued fighting at the bottom of the lake all day. Bluejay let the white paint ooze out of his mouth, and it made the water muddy, so 
that Talxama could not see. The brothers saw the water turn white, and 
said, ‘He has torn off the crown of our elder brother's head, and his brains 
come out.” 
When the water was becoming clear again, Bluejay let the red paint 
ooze out of his mouth; and the brothers, noticing the color of the water, 
said, “He is tearing our elder brother's flesh, and his blood runs out” Then 
they ran down to the edge of the lake. Blucjay fought fiercely, stabbing 
his enemy with his dagger. and striking him with his clubs. Talya'na fought 
by biting with his mouth, and tearing with his nails: so at last he tore off 
all Blucjay's armor of bark, and even his cuirass of hide? When evening 
came, Blucjay rose to the surface of the water, and cried, “Talya'na is getting 
+ The club referred to consisted of a ball of bearberry-root sewed up in skin, and attached to a short handle, with a wrist loop. © Some say it was of wood.  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 667 
the better of me! I cannot continue the fight much longer” But Talxana 
was also tired out, and, when Blucjay let him go, he rose to the surface of 
the water, and tried to escape. 
Then the brothers shot arrows at him as he swam, and killed him. 
They took his body ashore, stretched it out, and danced around it, singing 
a song of victory. 
Bluejay said, “To-morrow we will dispose of his body.” The next morning 
at sunrise Bluejay cut up Talya'na’s body, and threw some part of it to 
every tribe of Indians. Cutting off the scalp, he took it by the long hair, 
and threw it to the Cree tribe,’ saying, ‘I give you the scalp; therefore you 
will use scalps in dances, and wear them when you go to battle” He threw 
the hands and arms toward some other tribes, and the legs and feet toward 
others. Thus he threw away all the parts of Talxana’s body, including the 
insides; and every tribe got some part, each taking after the characteristics 
of the part they received. The heart was thrown to the Okanagon, therefore 
they are a brave people; and the head was thrown to some tribe? on the 
coast, therefore they have large heads, and behead their enemies. 
When all the parts had been disposed of, one of the brothers said to 
Bluejay, “You have forgotten our friends the Thompson tribe and the Lillooet.” 
Bluejay took up the knife he had been using, and threw it to the Thompson 
tribe, saying, “You will be called ‘Knife people,” or ‘Knives, and will be 
noted for fighting with daggers” Therefore the Thompson Indians are 
sometimes called ‘Knife (people)” and they became noted for fighting with 
knives, and for stabbing one another. Then he took some grass, wiped the 
blood off his hands, and threw the grass to the Lillooet, saying, “You will 
be the most unwarlike people, inferior to all others; you will only kill a 
person once in a while” After this the Shuswap increased, and became 
numerous. 
In later years a Fraser River Shuswap dreamed of Bluejay and this 
story, and changed his name to that of Blucjay. He became a noted warrior, 
and when old was all covered with scars. He alone killed many Chilcotin 
and Lillooet. 
10. STORY OF THE LoON. 
Bluejay and Pinejay were chiefs or head men of a large number of 
people, and each of them possessed two black dogs noted for their hunting- 
abilities. One day Bluejay said to the people, “It is now a long time since 
  
This is the reason why the Cree always took scalps, and alio the resson that they have finer heads of hair than any other tribe. 310 seems the Kwakiut are meant. + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 81.

----

668 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
our friends died. They have been buried many months, and we have had no games because of their deaths. It is now time that we ceased mourning. 
We will give a feast and have games, that our abode may become again as 
it used to be, and that we may regain our former cheerfulness.’ 
Then he sent all the women to dig roots, and the men to hunt, and 
told Loon, who was a good canoe-builder, to make a canoe to be used for 
catching fish and deer. Then Bluejay and Pinejay took their hunting-dogs 
and ran deer from the mountains into the lake, where Loon paddled after 
them in the canoe, and killed them in the water. 
When the people had obtained a sufficient supply of food, Blucjay, who 
was very wealthy, invited all the people of the neighboring district to a feast. 
The people he invited were noted players and gamblers, and their chief was 
Golden-Eagle. Their other head men were Bald-Headed Eagle, Chicken: 
Hawk, and Goose. Blucjay gave his guests a great feast and many presents. 
He also gave presents to those of his own people who had helped him. To 
Loon he gave a pair of leggings and a shirt embroidered with dentalia, and 
also a large and a small necklace of dentalium-shells. Golden-Eagle, seeing 
Loon dressed in his new clothes, and wearing the dentalium necklaces, played 
the stick-game (peku'm) with him for these. Golden-Eagle had won all the 
sticks from Loon, excepting a few counters, when the mats were spread, and 
the people were asked to eat. Then Golden-Eagle had to interrupt the 
game and go to the table, for he was the principal guest. Loon said, ‘We 
will finish the game by and by. My dentalia already belong to you. When 
we are through eating, we will play the game to its end.” 
After the people had finished their meal, the chiefs adressed them for 
a long time, and there was much talking and smoking. At last the games 
were started again, and Eagle said to Loon, “Now we will finish our game.” 
Loon said, “Yes. But I have no grass to hide my sticks in: I will go and 
get some” Whereupon he departed, moving very slowly toward the lake, 
for he was a slow traveller. After a while some of the people said, “Loon 
takes a long time. He is now near the lake, and has not gathered any 
grass yet” Then Eagle ran out to overtake Loon, but the latter reached 
the lake before he could catch him, and dived in. Coming up some distance 
away, he laughed, and, diving again, he came up near the centre of the 
lake. Once more he laughed, and then, diving, came up so far away that 
no one could see him. 
Eagle was angry, and thereupon transformed Loon into the bird ‘of that 
name which we see at the present day, and his necklaces of dentalia may be 
seen around his neck as two white rings! After this event, the gathering 
broke up, some of Eagle's people saying that Bluejay’s people were thieves.   
1 See L. Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 36 of this volume. ‘The Thompson Indians say that Loon's collar was once a deatalium necklace, and the white spots on hs body were dentalia.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 669 
11. THE Mamwmars steal FIRE From THE FIsHEs. 
The Fish people had all gone to bed, and their fire had burned low. 
The Mammals crept stealthily up in the darkness and took some of the 
embers! The Fishes knew what had happened, but were not inclined to 
rise. Their chief said, “Call out in a loud voice, ‘Our fire has been stolen!” 
Then the Tsokemu's fish called out, but his voice Was very weak. Next 
Teoktci'tcen * called; but his voice was not much stronger. Then Ma/melt® 
called out, but not loud enough. Now Kwa'ak * called, and his voice sounded 
very far; but by this time the Mammals were far away.    
12. STORY OF THE TSOLENUET'S SoN.* 
The Mammals made war on the Fishes, and killed them all except the 
wife of Tsblenitet! whom they took as a slave to their own country. She 
was pregnant’ at the time, and soon gave birth to a son. When he grew 
up, the other boys would call him bastard and little slave, and said that he 
was not one of them. He felt grieved at this, and complained to his mother, 
who informed him fully about his origin, and advised him to train himself 
that he might gain knowledge, and become the avenger of his father and 
his people. 
Acting on this advice, the boy retired to the mountains, where he slept 
many days at a time, and dreamed much. At last he gained Thunder for 
his guardian, and acquired from him the magic power of making lightning. 
Then he told his mother to dig a hole in the lodge secretly, large enough 
to hide in, and to prevent its being discovered by sleeping and keeping her 
property on it. 
One night the chief® said, “Let all the people sing their magic songs and imitate their guardians’® All the people crowded into the underground 
house, which was very large. One after another they danced, imitating the 
cries and actions of their guardians, and singing their songs. They had all 
finished except Coyote and the slave lad, and now their turn came. Coyote asked the slave boy to dance first; but he answered, “No, I do 
  
1 Or glowing coals. 7 A variety of fish with a red mouth or head. The meaning of the name is “litle red mouth.” + The fish commonly called whitefish in Briish Columbia. «A variety of fish with a large wide mouth. + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, . 77; also known to the Utkmat. © The name of a large species of rout called lla or (sila by the Thompson Indians, 1 think it is Selmo Clarkii, 7 Some say she was two months in pregnancy. * Some say the old men. * This was a common practice among the Shuswap, Thompson, and Lillooet Indians.  

----

670 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
not dance very well. 1 will wait and be the last” Then Coyote danced and 
sang, boasting much, and causing much amusement to the people. He said, 
“Watch me call my guardians. You will see much blood coming from my 
mouth. 1 am a great warrior” He called on the frame on which skins are 
dressed, and on salmoneggs. No blood came, although Coyote danced 
furiously; and the people laughed aloud, saying, “You must indeed be a great 
warrior, for you vomit so much blood, and your guardians are so powerful” 
At last the lad's turn came, and he began to dance and sing. The 
people did not know that he had been training. They sneered at him; and 
Coyote said, “How can a Fish-boy have a great guardian” The lad paid 
no attention, but sang louder and louder. The house became hot, and there 
was a noise like fire coming. The people began to feel alarmed; but Coyote 
put his hand on his mouth, and cried La“lalala’” and the house cooled off 
again. Four times he cooled the place thus: but the lad kept on singing 
louder than ever, and at last he shouted, ‘Come, strike” Then Thunder 
struck the house with his fire, and it began to burn. The lad went out, 
still dancing and shouting. The lightning struck the people, who tried to 
escape, and also set fire to the other houses. Thus all the people and their 
whole village were burned, and Tséfenivet’s son had his revenge. While the 
fire was raging, his mother had hidden in the hole that she had dug. Now 
she came forth, and they went to the Fish country, where he jumped over the bones of his father and of the other people, and thus revived them. 
13. Tue FisHES AND THE CANNIBAL. 
A cannibal lived with his family in a cafon through which flowed a 
river. His house was a cave in the rock, the entrance to which he made open and close at will. He spent most of his time hammering and chipping 
with an adze, as if engaged in making canoes. He probably did this so 
that the noise might attract people's attention. He had a canoe which he 
always left tied to the opposite side of the river, which was the side on 
which the people lived, and where a trail followed along the bank. Strangers 
passing along the trail often called to be taken across, and the cannibal 
invariably told them to take the canoe, and cross themselves. As soon as 
they reached the shore, he seized them and put them in his house, the 
entrance to which at once closed. Sometimes, however, the people who were 
crossing became afraid, when they came close enough to see the cannibal, 
for he had a very fierce appearance, and wore earrings and necklaces of 
human fingers, men's testicles, and finger and toe nails. Then they would 
turn around and paddle back; but the cannibal would hook them with a 
very long-handled hook which he always kept ready, and, drawing them 
ashore, would cat them. If he was not hungry at the time, he put them in

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 671 
his house, or took pleasure in placing them in the entrance, and seeing the 
rock close on them. 
The cannibal’s great magic power was the Cold, and any being that entered his house froze to death at once. Not far from the cafion lived a number of people in two houses! The Fishes inhabited one house, while in the other dwelt the water-birds; namely, the Swan, Goose, and many kinds of Ducks. These people knew what the cannibal did, and never went near the place where he lived. Once the Sturgeon's brother, thinking himself equal in magic to the cannibal, went over to his house and was killed. The Swan? alone could visit the cannibal with safety. The cannibal never attempted to harm him, and always asked him to return again soon and bring him news. 
One day the Fishes and Birds held a council, and came to the conclusion that they would all train themselves and try to master the secrets of the cannihal's mystery. After training a long time, the Sturgeon at last gained the desired knowledge. He learned how to make the rock open and shut, and how to counteract the Cold. 
Then he said to the people, “We will go and kill the cannibal and his family” They sent out the Swan as a scout, and he returned with the information that the cannibal and his family were asleep in the cave. Going up to the. house, the Sturgeon made the rock open, and they all walked in. The cannibal caused the rock to shut behind them, and pretended to welcome them, thinking that shortly they would all freeze to death. Then the Sturgeon opened his bag, which contained heat,! and soon the house was filled with a dense fog. Then the animals killed the cannibal and his family, opened the rock again, and went out. They said, “Henceforth the cannibal's house shall be only a common cave! the entrance to which shall never shut, and the cannibal himself shall be only a cafion mystery. Sometimes, but very rarely, people may get harmed if they see or hear his spirit, which shall henceforth haunt this place.” 
14. Worr ax WOLVERENE.S 
Wolf was a relative of Coyote’ and was noted as a hunter and a 
shaman. He lived with Wolverene. Wolf hunted deer and elk, while 
Wolverene caught beaver. He set nets in the creeks near beaver-dams, and 
then broke the beavers’ houses and dams, drove them into his nets, and 
killed them. 
  
Some say in one house, or together. * The Swan was + man noted for his goodness. # Sce Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indias, p. 25 of this volume. 4 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 45. + See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 41 of this volume. ® Some sy & brother, 
    

----

672 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
One day Wolf said to his companion, “I must leave you; for the game 
I hunt is now very scarce around here, and I must go to some place where 
it is more plentiful” He went to a different part of the country, where he 
found elk and deer abundant. There he made a lodge, and hunted, killing 
so many of these animals that before long he had his lodge hanging full of 
dried meat. 
Meanwhile beavers had become very scarce where Wolverene lived. He 
had caught most of them, and the remainder had left. He lived for a time 
on his dried beaver-meat; but at last that source failed. He was reduced 
to starvation, and became very thin. Then he decided to search for his 
friend Wolf, and to find out how he had fared, thinking he might have 
plenty of food. Soon he found Wolf's lodge, entered, and sat down near 
the door. He felt tired, for he was weak, and said to himself, *Wolf will 
see my plight, and feed me from his plentiful stores: for he saw that Wolf's 
house was hanging full of dried meat, — back-fat* and soq.* 
Wolf never spoke to Wolverene, but proceeded to heat stones and to 
boil some meat, which he ate when done, and emptied the brew out of the 
door of the lodge. Wolverene was very sad because Wolf offered him nothing 
to eat, and said to himself, “He has no pity on me when he sees me lean 
and hungry, but even insults me by throwing out the nourishing brew right close by my face. Well, Wolf shall find out that he is not the oaly shaman. 
I shall be even with him yet.” 
Thereupon Wolverene left the house, and, after travelling a considerable 
distance, reached a lake where beavers were very plentiful. Here he caught 
many of these animals, and before long had his lodge hanging full of their 
dried meat, and of beaver-tails tied in twos. Then, through his shamanistic 
powers, he made Wolf unlucky. Wolf could find few deer, and, when he 
did find any, he could not kill them. Wolf had to live on the stores of 
meat which he had laid up in his lodge; but at last he finished them all, 
and was reduced to boiling the old bones, and scraping the pieces of fat 
and meat adhering to skins. Even this at last failed, and Wolf bethought 
himself of Wolverene, saying, “I will search for his house and live with him; 
perhaps he has plenty of food.” 
Soon he found Wolverene's lodge, entered, and sat down at the door. 
Wolverene never spoke to him, but proceeded to cook some beaver-tails, 
and, after eating then, he threw the brew over Wolf's head out of the door 
of the lodge. Wolf then remembered how he had treated Wolverene, and 
said to himself, ‘He serves me as I served him” He forthwith left, and 
thereafter Wolf and Wolverene never lived together.   
© The best fat of an animal, cut off from the back in a single piece. + The “ack,” or fleshy and faty part of an animal, between the skin and the bones, aid off in one piece by the hunters.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 673 
15. WoLverese Axp Fisuer. 
Wolverene and Fisher lived together in the same house. One day, 
when Fisher was hunting, he saw a woman pass along in the distance. That 
night, when he returned home, he told his companion, saying he intended 
to follow her. Wolverene said, “It will be useless for you to follow her, she 
lives too far away” On the following morning Fisher went to the place 
where he had seen the woman, and, finding her tracks, he followed them for several days, but did not overtake her. Since he had nothing to eat, he 
returned to his camp, which he reached in a very exhausted state, emaciated 
and weak. 
Then Wolverene said he would search for the woman, and on the 
following morning he started out, carrying a woven buckskin bag filled with 
food. After travelling a long distance, he reached a house in which a 
number of people lived. At nightfall he crawled up to the house, and 
discovered the woman lying in a corner by herself, for she was menstruating. 
She had taken off all her good clothes before menstruating, and had placed 
them under her pillow." Then Wolverene assumed the form of a dog, entered 
the lodge, and ran away with the woman's moccasins. The people saw him, 
and cried out, “Oh! one of the dogs has taken our sister's shoes” The 
people chased the dog, but he disappeared in the darkness. 
Some time afterwards Wolverene returned, pulled the woman's leggings 
from underneath her pillow, and ran off with them also. The people cried, 
“Oh! one of the dogs has taken our sister's leggings!” and they pursued him 
as before. Shortly afterward he ran away with her bag in which she kept her sinew and sewing-materials; and thus he took her skirt, then her robe, and at last the woman herself. The people chased him each time, but always lost him in the dark. 
Then Wolverene resumed his original human form and told the woman 
that she must be his wife. He put all her belongings into his bag, and they 
travelled back to the home of Wolverene and Fisher, where the woman 
henceforth lived with the former, and bore many children to him. 
16. STORY OF AXA'NA;* OR, MARTEN AND FisHER. 
Marten and Fisher were brothers who lived together in an underground 
house. Fisher was a noted hunter and fisherman, and fed his brother on 
  
I These bags were used by the Canoe Lake and North Thompson Shuswap. They were of buckskin thongs woven like a dip-net, the mesh varying in size. Some were made of twisted caribou and elk skin. See p. 430. * The women of ll the interior Salish tribes separated from the people when mensiruting. They took off their good clothing, and pat it on again when their period was over. In the interval they dressed in old clothes, which they afterwards threw away or put aside in a tres to be used again during their next period. # Axa‘na is the mythological name of tbe marten, + Some say they lived with a family of people.

----

674 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the hind-hoofs of deer. When he brought home game, he always lowered 
it down the entrance with a rope, and Marten took it from him. Sometimes 
Marten wished to hunt; but Fisher would ask him to stay at home, saying, 
“I will do all the hunting, for you are a poor hunter, and get tired too 
quickly. You had better stay at home, or hunt in the vicinity of the house. 
Of one thing 1 warn you, however. If you shoot an arrow at a bird 
eastward and it misses, never go to pick it up." If you shoot in any other 
direction, you may go and recover it 
One day Marten saw a small bird which he desired to shoot, but it was 
due east of him. He tried to move around so as to be in a position to 
shoot his arrow in some other direction than due east; but the bird always 
flew away, and would alight east of him. At last he shot his best and most 
beautiful arrow at it, and missed, the arrow going a long way. He went 
to recover it; but the arrow kept moving away from him toward the east, 
and he followed it. 
Thus he was led some distance from home, and at last came to a lodge, 
which he entered. A woman? who was seated by the fire offered him 
roasted dricd salmon to eat. She handed it over to him across the fire, together with his arrow, which had made straight for this lodge, and had 
entered it. Marten asked her to throw the food to him; but she said, “No: 
reach over and take it” When Marten was taking it from her, she pulled 
him into the fire, and he was badly burned. She laughed at him, and he 
went home, taking the salmon and arrow along with him. He put both into 
his medicine-bag, and lay down with his head on them, expecting to dream, 
or to do some harm to’ the woman. 
When Fisher came home, he called from the top of the ladder, ‘Come, 
brother, take the meat” Marten felt angry and sick: therefore he would 
not arise, but answered pettishly, “Come, brother, take the meat!” Fisher 
called four times, and each time Marten simply repeated what Fisher said. 
Then Fisher let his pack of meat drop, and descended himself. When he 
saw what had happened, he said, “Aha! You followed your arrow to the 
east, did you? Well, you are in a bad state: I must hasten to cure you. 
Then he licked Marten all over with his tongue, excepting a little spot on 
his throat, and told him to run about. Marten obeyed, and said, “Now I feel quite well” Fisher said, “You look nice, and have a white spot on your 
throat where 1 did not lick you. I will leave you that way.” This is the 
reason that martes have white throats at the present day. ‘Now,’ he 
continued, “we will go and get the woman who burned you. You must help me” He gave him an elk-skin robe to carry, and told him what to do. 
  
In the North Thompson version, Marten is warned never to°go southward. His arrows were never known 
© In the North Thompson version, the Woodworm-Woman. She gives him salmon meat and roe 10 cat,

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 675 
When they entered the house, the woman offered Fisher food over the 
fire, and he reached out to take it. She gave a pull to draw him into the 
fire; but he jumped right over it with great force, and, knocking her down, 
fell on her and had connection with her. Then Marten covered them with 
the elk-skin robe, and left. Afterward Fisher took her to his house, and she 
became his wife.! One day, before going hunting, he told Marten to dress some buckskin 
very soft for his sister-indaw’s skirt. When Marten had done so, and had 
cut it out, he gave it to the woman, who was much pleased, for it was very 
soft, and fitted nicely. Then Marten sat down to eat, and, as he ate, the 
skirt began to shrink and became hard. It gave the woman so much pain, 
that she began to cry. Marten laughed, for he was now taking his revenge 
for being burned by the woman. When it was about time for Fisher to 
arrive, he made the skirt become soft again. 
When Fisher arrived, and saw tears in his wife's eyes, he asked why 
she had cried; and Marten answered, “It is impossible to satisfy a woman. 
She thinks her kilt is too hard.” Fisher felt of the skin, and said, ‘It is 
very good. 1 think it could not be softer. Why, then, do you ery? 
Again Fisher went hunting, and told his brother to look for a nice 
small pebble and a smooth flat stone? for his sister-inaw to crush bones on 
when extracting the marrow. Marten gave the stones to the woman, sat 
down to eat, and the hammer-stone at once grew in size and weight until it 
became a large bowlder. The woman cried, for she could not use the hammer 
at all. Marten merely laughed; and, when it was about time for his brother 
to arrive, he made the hammer small and shapely again. Fisher noticed 
tears in his wife's cyes, and said, “You have been crying again. What is 
the matter?” Marten answered, “It is impossible to suit women. She thinks 
the stones I got for her are too large and unshapely” Fisher examined 
them, and said, “Why! they are fine stones, and could hardly be better.” In due time the woman bore a son to Fisher; and the boy grew very 
rapidly, as did all the myth people. When the boy was able to walk and 
play, Fisher said to his brother one day, ‘I want you to help me hunt to-day. 
We will try to drive deer.” _ When they returned at night, they found the woman gone; and the boy 
informed them that a man® came there and took her away. They were 
going to start at once on their tracks; but the boy always cried when they 
left him. They gave him many different toys to pacify him, but still he 
would always cry when they left. At last they made a bow and arrows for 
him, and a small Deer to run around inside the house. The boy was now 
  
+ The preceding past of the story occurs also among the Utamat. + Some say to make a small hammer, nd a large fat stone hollowed 8 litle in the centre, * Some say a number of people.

----

676 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
satisfied, and was so engrossed chasing the Deer, that he paid no attention when they departed. They left food and water for him, and told the Deer 
to look well afer the boy during their absence. 
They followed the tracks that led away from the house, until one evening 
they came to a lake, where they saw two women in a bark canoe, and 
hailed them, asking to be taken across." The women had been fishing, and 
were going home with the trout they had caught. When they came ashore, 
Fisher asked the women what tracks those were that came down to the lake 
on the other side; and the women answered, “Those are the tracks of our 
friends, who have brought a new woman.’ — ‘Where do they live? asked 
Fisher; and the women answered, “A little ways over yonder, in an under- 
ground house. We live there also, and are going to take our trout home 
now.” Fisher asked them in what part of the house they slept, how they 
entered the house, and what they did. They answered, “We sleep on a 
raised platform in one corner; and when we enter, we jump down from the 
fourth step of the ladder, and then go over to our places in four steps. 
We amuse ourselves for a time throwing fish-cggs at the eyes of our younger 
sister. Then we accompany our brother's new wife to the lake to bathe, 
and upon our return we go to bed.” Then the brothers killed the two women, who were the Mouse and the 
Rat, and flayed them. Fisher put on the Rat's skin, and Marten the Mouse's 
skin; but the latter was not large enough to cover him entirely, so his 
privates and a piece around his cycs remained uncovered. Then they took 
the trout and repaired to the house. They entered and did everything just 
as the girls had told them. It was a little dark inside the house, and 
therefore they were not scen distinctly. After a while the younger sister of the Mouse and Rat remarked to 
her mother, “My sister the Mouse has different eyes from what she used to 
have, and is very different between the legs” The mother paid little 
attention, and said, “Hush! You must not talk about your sister in that 
manner. It will make her feel ashamed.” When the woman went out to 
bathe, they accompanied her, and told her who they were. They said, 
“Play much with your new husband to-night, that he may become tired and 
sleep soundly.” The woman did as directed; and when the man, whose name was 
Copper, commenced to snore, the brothers arose and cut off his head with a 
sharp knife that Fisher had concealed on his person. They slipped out 
quietly with the woman, took a canoe, and paddled away. When they 
reached the centre of the lake, they threw Coppers head overboard, and it 
sank to the bottom.   
"In the North Thompson version they follow in a bark canoe propelled by eight paddles, While crossing the lake, ¢ gale arises and all the paddles except one are broken.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 677 
Toward morning the younger sister said to her parents, “I am thirsty" 
and her father answered, “I hear your brother drinking. Go and drink with 
him” The noise was produced by the blood gurgling from Copper's body; 
and the little girl, who had gone to her brother's bed, called to her father, 
“Brother is not drinking. I don’t know what he is doing” But the old man 
never answered, for he was sleepy. 
When the people arose, they found Copper's headless body, and, instead 
of the Rat and the Mouse, they found only their skins. They started in 
pursuit, but by this time the brothers had crossed the lake, and were far on 
their way home. When the pursuers reached the middle of the lake, they 
saw ‘a bright spot underneath the water, and knew it to be Copper's head lying on the bottom. They called all the waterbirds to dive for it; but 
Loon would not go, and nonc of the others succeeded in reaching it. At 
last Loon dived and brought up the head. Loon's eyes are exceedingly 
bright and fiery at the present day because he dived for Copper. They took 
the head home, put it on Copper's body, and he came to life again. They 
said, “The friends of the woman we stole have committed this deed.” They 
never tried to steal Fisher's wife again. Fisher and Marten reached home safely, and found that the Deer had taken good care of the boy. 
17. STORY OF SKUNK AND BEAVER. 
A great many® animals lived together in a large underground house. 
Among them were Elk, Deer, Grisly Bear, Wolverene, Hare, Lynx, and 
Coyote. Skunk lived with them, for he was married to one of their daughters. 
He was disliked, however, and Coyote and Lynx always made fun of him. 
One night the people proposed that they should play, and sing their medicine- 
songs. One after another they danced and called their guardian spirits. 
When Lynx finished, he sat down at the foot of the ladder. Then Coyote 
danced, and created great amusement. He called on wooden pins, a half- 
eaten carcass, and other foolish, worthless things as his guardians. 
Now Skunk whispered to his wife to lie down flat, for he intended to 
sing presently. He was a quiet fellow, and had never sung at any of their 
events hitherto. The people thought him useless, lazy, and sulky. When 
all had finished, Skunk arose and said he would try to sing like the other 
people. Coyote made fun of him, calling him nasty names, and jeering at 
him. He answered, “I know very little, and am very weak in magic power. 
You may laugh at me if you like” Then he commenced to sing, ‘Pa“po-po- po’ and the people jeered. When he called on the Stench as his guardian, 
  
1 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 64 et seq + Compare pats of hs Sony with Teh, Teodions of he Thompaon River Ininas, . 37 + Some say all.

----

678 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Coyote said, “Oh! our son-in-law has indeed a powerful guardian spirit. He 
is great in magic power” The stench of Skunk filled the place. Four times 
he called, and the people commenced to choke. They said, “The smell of 
Skunk’s guardian spirit kills us,” and they ran up the ladder as fast as they 
could. In their hurry they trod on Lynx's head; and others trampled him 
down and kicked him in the face and ribs, thus disfiguring him. It was a 
long time before his bruises healed up: and he remained ugly, as we see 
him at the present day, while previously he had been very handsome. 
Another night the people were again showing their magic powers; but 
Skunk would not dance. However, after being abused by the people, and 
mocked at by Coyote, he danced at last. He had asked Beaver to help him, 
who had dammed up the creek’ near by. Skunk sang, and called on the 
Water as his guardian, saying, “Now come, Water! Now help, Beaver!” 
Skunk and his wife went out, while the others laughed at him because the 
Water did not come. Then the water rushed in at the top of the underground 
house, and drowned all the people except Coyote, who swam round and 
round, with only his head above water. Skunk mocked him, and ejected 
his stench at him. He left him there, and with his wife joined Beaver, who 
was his friend, and with whom he afterwards lived. 
18. Tue Hare axp THE GRISLY Bears. 
[This story is the same as that told in Teit, “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” pp. 66, 67, with the following additions. When the Hare came home, he said to his grandmother, “Grisly Bear will be angry and come here to kill me. When he enters the house, throw the pitch-wood into the fire, that the house may be full of smoke. Then I will kill him.” — Hare's weapon was a tomahawk, which he held ready behind his back. — Afier Hare had had connection with his grandmother, he sat down on top of the ladder, and three times he asked some people passing on the other side of the river if they had any news. They answered, “No.” The fourth time that people passed he asked them the same question, and they answered, “Ves. Hare has had connection with his grandmother, and killed her by putting his penis into her nose.’ 
      
19. STORY OF KUTLIXWA'TAXEN® OR THE WREN.® 
Wren lived with his grandmother. He was a young man possessed of 
magic powers. One day he took an adze in his hands and went out to build 
a double salmon-weir; but he felt lazy, and lay down and commanded the 
trees to fell themselves. This they did. Then he said, “Cut yourselves into 
lengths” and at once the noise of many hammers and chisels was heard,   
+ Some say river. 2 This is the mythological name for the wren. It is really a nickname derived from the peculiar movements of the bird. + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompton River Indias, p. 75. 4 Some say they were the only inhabitants of the country, the rest of the people having been exterminated by a great fire.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 679 
and the trees, were soon all cut the proper lengths. Then he said, “Drag 
yourselves to the stream; and immediately they obeyed. In this way, by 
six commands, he completed the weir, and by six more commands he 
constructed a drying-platform and fishing-implements, and made the salmon 
catch themselves, cut themselves up, and hang themselves on the poles. 
Then he hastened and told his grandmother, who would not believe 
him, for she said it took many men many days to complete a double salmon- 
weir; and she was much surprised, when she went to look, to find that he 
had told the truth. 
On the following morning, when he went to the weir, he found most 
of his salmon stolen; and, upon examining the ground, he noticed the tracks 
of a grisly bear. He hastened to his grandmother, and told her that Grisly 
Bear had stolen his salmon, and that he intended to kill him. His grandmother said, “Grisly Bear is a large and fierce man. A small weak 
person like you is not able to kill him, for in former days only the bravest 
and most skilful hunters managed to kill one once in a while." 
Nothing daunted, Wren tied his robe tightly around him, and, taking 
his tomahawk, repaired to the drying-platform, where he hid himself. Early in the morning Grisly Bear appeared, and began to help himself to the 
remaining salmon. Wren now sprang out, and asked Grisly Bear why he stole 
the fish. The Bear rushed at Wren, thinking he could kill him at once; 
but the latter avoided the Bear's charges by always jumping away. Before 
Grisly Bear could recover himself, Wren would strike him on the head. 
Thus the Bear became exhausted by his fruitless exertions, and the repeated 
blows he received began to tell on him. Wren was still as nimble as ever, 
and redoubled his endeavors, until at last he killed the Bear. 
Then he hastened to his grandmother, and told her that he had killed 
Grisly Bear. This she would not believe until she went with him and saw 
the carcass. She asked him to skin the bear carefully, removing the skin 
in one piece with the claws adhering. Wren gave her the skin, and asked 
her to dress herself in it. When she had done so, he admired her so much 
that he desired to have sexual intercourse with her. Having gratified his 
passions, he found that his grandmother was dying as the result. He was 
very sorry for his act; and when she was dead, he wept bitterly.! 
20. STORY OF MUSKRAT. 
A pubescent girl lived in her lodge near the village. She had nearly finished her training; and several young men, including Muskrat, had asked to marry her. Her parents had spoken to her regarding these, but she had   
1 Some say she did not die; and others say they bad formerly heard more of the story; compare Boss, Teimsbian Texts, p. 121.

----

680 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
refused them all. Muskrat made up his mind to kill her, and made a 
number of snowshoes and arrows of different types, in imitation of those 
used by the surrounding tribes, — the Shuswap, Thompson Indians, Lillooet, 
Cree, and Chilcotin. He made about twenty kinds of arrows and about ten 
kinds of snowshoes. 
At last one night he killed the girl, shooting one of each of the different 
kinds of arrows into her body. Then, putting on the snowshoes one after 
another, he ran around the girl's lodge in all directions. On the following 
morning the people found the girl dead, with many arrows in her body, and 
snowshoe-tracks all around the place. They said, “It is impossible to tell who killed her. There must have been a war-party of many strangers here.” 
“They took the girl's body into the underground house, and tried to 
revive her with the help of the shamans. When they had all failed, the 
people asked Muskrat, who was a young shaman, to try. He answered, 
“I will try; but I have not much chance, when all the old, experienced 
shamans have failed” Now he began to dance and sing in a different 
manner from the other shamans. He danced round the body, then towards 
the ladder and up some steps, and back again. Four times he did this. 
One time, when halting in his song, he said to himself in a low voice, ‘I 
am the one who killed the girl” Coyote, who was sitting nearest to him, 
overheard him, and whispered to the people, “He killed the girl” Some of 
them answered, “If he does not manage to bring her to life again, we will 
kill him” The fourth time, as he danced up the ladder, he cried out in a 
loud voice, “I killed the girl” then bolted for the lake, and dived down the 
hole in the ice where the people drew their water. 
The people pursued him. Coyote was close behind, and nearly caught 
him. He called to the people, “Hurry up! I am holding him” Now they 
all stood around the hole with their spears, ready to stab him as soon as 
Coyote should pull him out. Coyote plucked some grass by the roots from 
the lake-bottom, and made a great ado, saying it was very hard to pull him up. At last, after telling the people to be ready, he slowly pulled his arms 
out of the water, and exposed in his hands some grass and mud. ‘Oh! he 
must have escaped.” he said, laughing. 
The people were angry. They left Coyote. Some of them went aboard 
a bark canoe, and chased Muskrat all around the lake; and others tried to 
get a shot at him by running round on the ice. Although they chased him 
until dark, they could not even get within arrow-shot of him, for he was a 
very fine swimmer and diver. Finally they had to give up the pursuit, and 
they went home while he was laughing at them. 
Now Beaver joined Muskrat. He said, “We look very much alike, and, 
as we are friends, we will sit here for a while and talk” As they sat 
together, Beaver commenced to admire Muskrat's tail, and wished that his 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 681 
were like it. At that time,Muskrat had the tail that Beaver has now, while 
the latter had the tail we see on the muskrat at the present day. Beaver 
said, ‘I wonder how we should look if we changed tails” This they did, 
and Beaver said, “You look fine with my tail. I will go into the water and 
try your tail, then afterwards you can tfy mine” Beaver dived and swam 
about, - striking his tail on the water, and making a loud noise. He was pleased because he could swim so much better, and gradually swam farther away from the shore. 
Now Muskrat became suspicious, and swam out after him; but Beaver caused a strong wind and high waves to come; so Muskrat, finding that he made little headway, and that he could not swim as well as before, gave up the chase. When he came ashore, he was transformed into the muskrat that we see at the present day, and it was decreed that he shoul have to live along the shore, and never swim out into the deep water of large lakes, as he had been wont to do. 
  21. Story oF GRISLY BEAR'S AND BEAVER'S CHILDREN, INCLUDING 
THAT oF CovoTe AND THE Ecos.” 
Grisly-Bear-Woman and Beaver-Woman lived in the same house. Each of them had two sons, all halfgrown lads. The elder son of Grisly Bear was named Tcuke'kenakst! and the elder son of Beaver was called Teekemaiya! Every day the women went out together to dig roots. One day, while engaged at their usual occupation, Grisly Bear said to her companion, ‘Let us rest a while, and I will louse your head.” Beaver was nothing loath, as she felt tired, and she laid her head on the other's lap. Grisly Bear proceeded to louse her, and showed her some of the lice, saying, “What strange lice you have! Their bellies hang down, and their legs turn out” When she had finished, Beaver said she would louse Grisly Bear's 
head. She was rather nettled because she thought Grisly Bear had compared 
the lice to her own shape, thus making fun of her. She took some of Grisly 
Bear's lice and showed them to her, saying, “What funny lice you have! 
Their eyes are so very small, and their backside so very large” This remark 
was intended as a description of Grisly Bear's peculiarities, and made her 
very angry. She flew at her companion and killed her. She ate her 
excepting the breasts, which she took home in her basket to eat at night. When she reached the lodge. she told Beaver's children that their 
  
* The Indians are doubtful as to who transformed him. Some say the people whom he had wronged; others say Old-One or Coyote. + See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 69 et seq. 3 This name is derived from the word for “claws.” 4 This word is derived from the word for “breasts”

----

682 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
mother had been tired and had to camp, but that she would be home on 
the morrow. When she thought that the children were asleep, she took 
out the breasts and roasted them; but Teekema/iya was watching her. When 
she began to eat, he cried out, “Oh! my mother's breasts” Grisly Bear 
turned her back to him, that he might not sec what she was doing, and 
answered, “Go to sleep! Those are large roots that I am eating” But the 
lad knew better, and made up his mind to be careful. 
The next morning Grisly Bear, before going out, told her children 
secretly to cook a large mess of boiled roots and berries (nkaux), and to 
invite Beaver's children to eat with them. She asked them to induce 
the others to eat plenty, but to cat sparingly themselves. Afterwards they 
were to invite Beaver's children to swim in the lake, and then, under 
the pretext of a wrestling-match, they should drown them. “You will manage 
this” said she, “because they will be full and heavy; while you willbe light 
and agile. After drowning them, take the body of the clder, roast it on a 
stick, and set it up on the trail the way I come home. 
The young Grisly Bears cooked the roots as they had been told; but 
Teckema'iya was suspicious, and warned his younger brother not to eat of 
it. When the meal was ready, and they began to eat, they emptied each 
spoonful down the neck of their shirts; while the Grisly Bears, not being 
able to restrain their appetites, ate their fll. When they went to the lake, 
and began to wrestle, the Beavers quickly drowned their antagonists. They 
took the body of Teuke'kenakst, roasted it, and stuck it on the trail by which 
Grisly Bear was expected to come home. Here they met Meadow-Lark, 
and told him, when Grisly Bear should begin to eat the roast, to cry out the name of her son. They hurried back to the lodge, put two rotten logs in 
their bed, covered them up, and ran away as fast as they could. When 
they came to the caon of the river, where it was narrow and very swift, 
they threw a log across and went over. They came to a steep cliff which 
they could not ascend; therefore they made a ladder out of a tree, placed it 
against the cliff, and climbed up to the top and sat down. 
Grisly Bear felt hungry, and, thinking of the savory morsel waiting 
for her, went home sooner than usual. Soon she found the roast; and when 
she began to eat it, Meadow-Lark drew near, and called out, “Tcuke'kenakst, 
Teuke'kenakst! You are eating Teukekenakst” Grisly Bear looked at the 
feet, and at once recognized the claws. She ran to the lodge to kill the 
Beaver boys, and bit and clawed the figures which she found in their bed, 
only to find that they were logs. Then she searched for the tracks of the 
children, and gave chase. 
She reached the cafion, and crossed the log, but was afraid to climb the 
  
1 Some say Teekema'iya overheard the conversation.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 683 
ladder. When she saw the Beavers sitting on the top of the cliff, she asked 
them to come down, saying that their mother had come home and had sent 
her after them; but they scolded her, and accused her of killing their mother. 
At last, when she saw that they would not come down, she began to ascend 
the ladder; but soon she became afraid. Teckemafiya said he would hold 
the ladder steady for her, but, when she had nearly reached the top, he 
pushed it over; and Grisly Bear was precipitated into the foaming river, and 
was drowned. Her carcass floated ashore below, and began to putrefy. 
Now Coyote, who was travelling with his son, came along and found it. 
He said, “This is fine meat: and his son answered, “Yes! let us cut off a 
leg and roast it” But Coyote said it would be better to dig a hole in the 
carth, and bake it in one piece, after the manner of roots. When they had 
done this, they went to sleep expecting that it would be cooked and ready 
to eat in the morning. . 
About daybreak many people came along on their way to a large swamp, 
where they were going to gather eggs. When they saw Coyote and his 
son asleep, they opened the oven, took out the meat, and ate it all excepting 
a little fat, which they used to smear the mouths and hands of the sleeping 
Coyotes. When Coyote awoke, he found the oven open and the meat all 
eaten. When he looked at his son, he saw grease on his mouth and hands, and thought that he had robbed him. Therefore he beat him with a stick. 
The son denied his guilt; but the father said, “Why is there grease on your 
mouth and hands” The lad answered, “Why is there grease on your own mouth and hands? Thus Coyote discovered that a trick had been played on 
them. He found the tracks of the people and followed them. In the afternoon 
he overtook them while they were gathering eggs in the swamp. He turned 
aside, and changed himself into a large overspreading tree on a smooth dry 
piece of ground; while he transformed his son into the lower branch of the 
tree, with his arm hanging down, and looking as if the end of the branch 
were nearly broken off 
In the evening the people looked for a place to camp, and selected the 
ground at the bottom of the tree. Here they dug a trench to bake the 
eggs, which they expected would be ready to eat in the morning. One 
woman said, “This is a nice tree to camp under. It is a wonder I have not 
noticed it before when here’ Another woman saw the piece of branch 
hanging down, and said, “That broken limb will make a fine root-digger:" 
so she twisted it off and gave it to one of the men to whittle. When the 
root-digger was finished, he placed it beside the woman, who had by this 
time retired for the night, and at once it had connection with her. She 
shoved it over to the next woman, with whom it did the same. Now, the people wondered at this, and the men threw it away. 
When all had retired, Coyote blew on them, making them sleep very

----

684 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
soundly. Then he dug out the eggs, and he and his son ate them all. 
They took the shells, and he tied a couple to the privates of each one of 
the sleepers, and then went on his way. When the people arose, there was 
a noise of shells rattling, and they thought it was a south wind striking the 
trees in the neighboring mountains. Then the people discovered that the 
shells made the noise, and that all their eggs had been eaten. They said, 
“That is Coyote, who has followed us, and got even with us for eating 
his meat.” 
22. Story oF THE Lynx! 
Once there lived a good-looking girl who had many suitors, none of 
whom she cared for; and, as they bothered her a great deal, she made up 
her mind to leave home and go to the country where her grandmother lived. 
The old woman knew that she was coming, and, thinking the young men of 
the place would also want to marry her, she made her arrangements 
accordingly? . . 
The people who had deserted them were starving. One day they sent 
Crow to see how Lynx was faring. Lynx's wife gave Crow a piece of fat 
to take home. This he rolled up in black moss, and at night fed his children 
with it. The people rushed in while the children were eating, and asked 
why they made so much noise. Crow answered, ‘I am feeding them with 
roasted black moss (hémé'lk).” They did not believe that children would 
become so excited over some black moss: therefore they watched, and, when he 
fed them again, they rushed in and caught them swallowing fat. Now they 
were angry at Crow for not telling them that Lynx had plenty of food. 
They moved back to the village, and found that Lynx had filled with fat 
the houses of those who had not trodden on him. Because Coyote had 
kicked him, he filled his house with excrement. Now Coyote went around 
trying to claim the houses which contained fat; but the rightful owners 
drove him away, and at last threw him into his own house among the 
excrement. 
23. SToRY oF BaLp-HeAvED EAGLE 
Bald-Headed Eagle lived in an underground house with other birds; 
while near by lived Golden-Eagle and the Hawks, in another house. When 
  
+ See. Hill Tout, Story of Flk-Maiden. Boss, Indianische Sagen, cic, p. 0. 3 The rest of thi story is the same as that told in Teit, “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians.” p. 37, with the following exceptions and additions. Her grandmother made a fog, that the snmals who raced might not find the girl. — She hid the girl in a basket, which she hung up on the post of her underground house. — Lynx made a bole immedistely above it, and at night urinated down along the post, thus making the girl pregnant. — The bow that the Lynx offered. to the boy had a string of “kwoes™ bark, and the arrow-heads were fastened on the shafts with the same material. The end of the story as told by the Shuswap is given above. + See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indias, p. 10 of this volume. «See Tei, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 67; lso known to the Utkmat and Lillooet. 
     

----

TEXT, THE SHUSWAP. 685 
Bald-Head was fishing one day, he saw a woman approach his weir to cross over the stream. He met her in the middle of the weir, and would not 
let her cross. She tried to coax him, and called him many endearing names; 
but he never moved or spoke. She called him grandfather, father, uncle, 
brother-in-law, brother, but without avail. At last she called him husband; 
and at once he said, “Why did you not say that before? He now claimed 
her as his wife, and took her home.'... 
The woman left Golden-Eagle and lived by herself for a time. Then 
the head of Bald-Headed Eagle came to life, went to her hut, and married 
her. When he had connection with her, the head entered her privates. 
When he had finished and came out again, he asked to wipe him. After a 
time she had two children, who were heads also. Then she said she would 
visit her people. Wherever she went, the three heads followed her. When 
she came close to the houses of the people, some of them recognized her, 
and called out, “Our sister approaches with two little white dogs and a 
larger one following her” When she arrived, the people asked her what 
these things were that always rolled after her wherever she went. She 
answered, “These are my husband and children.” 
The people did not like them: so they made up their minds to kill 
them. They engaged three men! named Spittle, Matter, and Cough, who 
were impervious to heat and had bodies that could not be hurt, to make a 
sweathouse. They covered the sweathouse above, below, and around with 
mysterious power, so that nothing could escape. They heated stones to a red 
heat, and induced Bald-Headed Eagle and his two children to have a sweat: 
bath. Then they poured much water on the stones, and the hot steam made the two smaller heads burst. Bald-Headed Eagle was severely scalded, and tried to escape, but was unable to do so. Then he attacked Spittle, 
Matter, and Cough with his beak, but could not hurt them. They continued to pour water on the stones, until at last Bald-Headed Eagle exploded. Then 
the people threw the ‘dead heads away, saying, “Henceforth you shall be a 
common bald-headed eagle. You shall no longer have mysterious power, 
and never again shall you be able to molest women.” 
24. THE BROTHERS WHO MARRIED THE GRISLY-BEAR GIRL. 
Near a little lake in Empire Valley, called Komenka'ksyen® there lived 
some people under the bluff in an underground house. They were Grisly 
  
From here on the story is the same as the Thompson Indian tale “Battle of the Birds,” in Teit, Traditions, etc. pp. 67 and 68, except that the collar armor of Bald-Headed Esgle is said to consist of two woven rabbitskin baskets and two bark-twine nets. The story then continues. 3 Some say there was a fourth man, but none of the Indians was sure who he was, Some said that probably be was Whistle, + So called because of pointed rocky bluf there,

----

686 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Bear people, and at that time Coyote was living with them. Among them 
was a beautiful girl with whom many of the neighboring youths fell in love. 
Among her lovers were four brothers, the youngest of whom had a lame 
leg. The eldest went to marry the girl, and, before entering the house, he 
hung his quiver and arrows on the top of the ladder. He was accepted as 
the girl's husband, and remained with her. That night her friends took all 
the heads off his arrows! On the following morning they shouted, “Four 
grisly bears are feeding on the other side of the lake. Son-indaw, go and 
shoot them!” He took his quiver without looking at the arrows, went down 
to the lake, launched a bark canoe, and crossed the water. When he landed, 
the bears attacked him fiercely, and killed him, for his arrows had no effect 
on them. The next brother went to marry the girl, and then the third; but they fell into the same trap, and were killed. 
The youngest said to himself, “Something is wrong, and I must dis- 
cover what it is” He went up the mountains to gain supernatural help, and 
learned through a dream how his brothers had perished. Then he returned, 
and told the people that he intended to marry the Grisly Bear girl. The 
people said, “Your elder brothers were better than you, and used to kill grisly 
bears ; yet these people must have got the better of them. If they failed to get 
the girl, you surely will be unsuccessful” He did not pay any attention to 
their warnings, hid firessticks within his shirt, on the left side of his body, 
and sinew and four fine arrow-heads on the right side and went to the 
house of the Grisly Bears and hung his quiver on the top of the ladder. 
He was accepted as the girl's husband; and on the following morning her 
people told him that four grisly bears were feeding on the opposite side of 
the lake, and asked him to kill them. When he launched the canoe, Coyote 
said, “Your soninlaw will be killed like the others;” for he knew that the 
people had taken the heads off all his arrows. The young man stopped in the middle of the lake, and took fire.drill 
and tinder from within his shirt, with which he made a small fire. Then he 
melted some gum that he took from the canoe. Then he tied on the four 
arrow-heads with sinew, gummed them, and threw the fire away. Then he 
proceeded and went to meet the bears, who attacked him but he killed them, 
each with one arrow. After he had done so, he returned and transformed 
the people into grisly bears, saying, “Henceforth you shall be ordinary bears, 
and hunters shall shoot you with arrows” Coyote ran away during the 
transformation. The young man took the girl home," and she lived with him 
after being purified with herb medicine.   
+ Some say they transformed. his arrows; others, that they simply passed their bands over them, thus making them defective, or ready to bresk or fall of. + Some ‘say he had sinew on one side of in bis quiver. + Some say he transformed the gil and the house into stone. 
  body, and arrowheads on the other, while the fresticks were

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 687 
25. Tie WOMEN WHO SOUGHT FOR A HUSBAND; OR, Trp WouN who 
MARRIED THE CANNIBAL (STAR) AND WOLVERENE.! 
Two young women? could not get along with the people, so they said 
they would leave, and live by themselves. They agreed to train themselves, 
and then to wander over the country in search of husbands. For four moons 
they trained themselves, and then tried their magic powers. They reached 
an open plain, the elder one sang, and a tree with branches only at the top 
grew out of the prairie. When it had grown very high, she stopped singing, 
and the tree stopped growing. Again she sang, and the tree became shorter 
and shorter, until at last it disappeared. Again the elder sang and the 
prairie split- open, leaving a deep chasm. She pulled a hair out of her head, 
threw it across the chasm, and it became a bridge, on which they crossed. 
Again she sang, and the chasm gradually closed, leaving no mark. 
The women went on, and came to a large valley. Then the younger 
one sang, and the valley was filled with water, which rose up to the tops of 
the hills on each side. She took a hair from her head and threw it on the 
water, thus making a bridge, on which they crossed. Again she sang, and 
the water receded until the valley was dry again. Once more the younger 
one sang? “Now. said they, ‘we are wise in magic. If danger assails us, 
we are safe” 
Then they started to seek for a husband, and camped the first night at 
a fine open spot near a stream. Here they lay down. Before going to sleep, 
they looked at the stars overhead, and wished that one of the large bright 
ones would become their husband. That night the Star came down and lay between them! When they awoke in the morning, they saw an old man 
with sore eyes in their bed. They were surprised and disgusted as well as 
afraid. As the man appeared to be asleep, they arose quietly and ran away 
into the forest, where they thought he would not find them. 
They came to a trail, which they followed until a large gray log barred 
the way. “That is a strange-looking log,” they said. “It is too thick to climb 
over’ Let us go around it” But the log grew lengthwise, the end always 
keeping ahead of them. They turned back, and tried to go around the other 
end, but with the same result. Then the elder woman kicked it, saying, 
“What kind of a magic log is this!” At once the log changed into a man, 
who said, “You wish for a husband. 1 will take you for my wives” They 
answered, “Very well” and went with him to his house. He hunted every 
  
* See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcorin Indians, p. 31 of this volgme.  * Some say sisters. 21 could not get any one to inform me what her lst feat was. + Some say this star was the cannibal with whom they afterwards lived. © Some say they said, “It looks dangerous to step over.”

----

688 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
day, and brought home different kinds of meat, which he rolled up in grass 
and placed on the shelves of poles which were all around his house. The 
first day he roasted some and offered it to the women, who refused it because they did not know what kind of meat it was. They never saw him 
eat anything, and, although he lay between them at night, he never showed any desire to have connection with them. They said, ‘Our husband is a 
queer man.” 
One night the younger woman watched, and saw him get up, go to the 
shelves, and, after eating heartily of the meat there, return to his place in 
the bed, and fall asleep. Next night she watched again, and saw him get 
up, sharpen his knife, and uncover the feet of the other woman. He cut a 
deep gash the whole length of the sole of one foot, which he eagerly 
examined, saying. “She is hardly fit to eat yet. 1 will wait until she is 
fatter.” Then he spat on the palm of his hand, and, rubbing the saliva on 
the cut, it healed up at once, leaving no mark. 
The following morning the younger woman said to her companion, “Did 
you not feel our husband cutting your foot last night” She said, “No!" 
So the younger one told her all about it. Then they looked on the shelves, 
and found much human flesh and also rib and breast pieces cut off in the 
same manner as Indians cut up deer. Now they knew that their husband 
was a cannibal, and that he intended to eat them. So, after throwing all 
the fiesh and bones into the fire, they left the place. When the cannibal 
came home and found his wives gone, he went in pursuit and soon over- 
took thém. 
When they saw he was near, the younger woman sang, and a lake 
formed before them. She threw a hair of her head on the water, and it 
stretched straight across, forming a bridge, on which they crossed. The 
cannibal cried out, “Why do you leave me” They answered, “You can follow” He walked out on the surface of the lake a little distance, and 
then sank! They thought that he was drowned, but soon they saw him following again. Then the elder sister sang, and a tall tree grew out of the 
carth underneath them, in the top branches of which they sat? The cannibal 
passed by, looking for them, and disappeared. Then they caused the tree 
to disappear again, and continued their journey. Again they saw the cannibal 
close behind them. Then the elder one sang, and the earth split in front 
of them, forming a deep chasm. She took a hair from her heall, threw it 
across, and on this they went over as if on a log. She told it to break 
when the cannibal should step on it. The man cried, “Why do you leave 
me? and they answered, “Follow us; we will wait for you” The cannibal 
hesitated to cross; but the women assured him that the log was quite strong.   
+ Some say the younger woman told the bridge to break, or turn over, and throw him into the water. + Some say it grew up, then they climbed it and hid.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 689 
When he was in the middle of the chasm, it broke, and he fell down to the bottom. They could hear his voice from the distant depths calling, “Take 
me out? The women sang, and the chasm gradually closed, crushing and 
burying him. Now they went on leisurely, for there was no need of further fear of 
the cannibal. Soon they reached a lake, took off their clothes, and had a 
bath. A beaver was swimming around, and struck his tail on the water. 
Then they wished they had a husband to kill the beaver, that they might 
cat its tail. Wolverene was on the edge of the lake, looking for a beaver 
that he had wounded, and heard their wish. Noiselessly he went up behind 
them, and touched each of them on her backside with his toe. They turned 
around, and were surprised to see a man there. He said, “I am the man 
you wished for a husband” They agreed to be his wives. They built a 
house at that place; and Wolverene hunted beaver, and procured plenty of 
meat and tails for his wives to cat. They made many beaver robes. They 
lived there two years, and cach of the women bore a child. Then Wolverene 
by magic compressed a great amount of meat into three bags made of beaver-cub skins. He and his wives carried these along. They were going 
to the houses of the people; and, on arriving there, Wolverene shook out the 
contents of the sacks, and the meat filled two underground houses. Thenceforth 
they lived with the people. Wolverene was a short man, but very strong 
and a great hunter. 
26. SeipER AND OTTER. 
A number of people lived near a large lake. Among them was a young 
woman who had refused all suitors. One day, when she was drawing water 
at the lake, Otter seized her, and, putting her in his bark canoe, paddled 
away to the other end of the lake. Here he hid his canoe in the bushes, 
and, after travelling with the girl a long distance, they reached the shores 
of a very large lake. Here he made the girl jump on his back, and, telling 
her to shut her eyes, he dived into the water. and soon reached his house. 
The people searched for the girl in vain, and at last came to the 
conclusion that she had been drowned. Now, Spider, who lived in the sky, 
had seen all that had happened, and made up his mind he would have the 
woman. One day he came down from the sky on a rope, carrying his 
tomahawk with him, and, going to Otters hole, he sat down to wait for him. 
Otter had a hole in the ice through which he was wont to come out when 
he went hunting and fishing. When he appeared, Spider killed him. Then 
he called the woman and took her up to the sky with him.   
+ Some say his house was at the bottom of the lake, or, at least, that he had 10 go along the bottom of the, ake to seach it.

----

690 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Here she staid, and bore Spider two children. When the children were 
old enough, Spider said to his wife, “We will go to the earth and visit your 
people. They will be glad to see you and your children. We will make 
them happy.” Spider went hunting, and killed many deer, the flesh, fat, and 
skins of which he made to assume such small proportions that he could put them all in the thumb of his mitten, which he attached to the end of his 
rope, and lowered down to the earth. Then he lowered down his children 
and his wife, and finally he descended himself. 
When they reached the houses of the people, Spider shook his mitten; 
and the meat, falling out of the thumb, assumed its original proportions, and 
filled an entire underground house. The people were very glad to see the 
woman who they thought had been drowned, and to hear her story. Spider 
gave a feast to the people with the meat he had brought, and gave them 
all the fat and skins as presents. The woman and her children continued 
to live with the people, but some say Spider after having staid on earth 
some time, returned to the sky. 
27. Story oF THE Suvon-Bov.! 
A lad who lived with his grandparents went playing one day, and did 
not return. The people searched for him, and found the place where he 
had fallen into the river. His bow and arrows were lying on the bank. 
The boy had been amusing himself by tobogganing on a piece of bark, and 
had slid over a bluff, alighting on a picce of ice? which was floating down 
the river. Thus he floated down to the mouth of Fraser River, and arrived 
in the land of the salmon, where there was a great fish-dam. 
After staying there some time, he told the Salmon chief that he wished 
to return home. The chief said, “Yes. When the Salmon go to your 
country, they shall take you with them” Soon the Sockeye Salmon started 
to run, and the boy wished to accompany them but the chief said, “No, 
you must not go with them. You would be hurt. They travel through 
many dangerous places” At last the King Salmon started, and the chief gave the boy into their charge, and he swam with them after having been 
transformed into a salmon. 
Now, the boy's grandfather cried all the time, because he believed his 
grandson to be dead. When the salmon began to run, he made a weir 
across the small stream near which he lived, and there he fished by bag- 
netting. The boy came swimming up, and was caught by his grandfather, 
who was about to split and dry him, like other fish, when he noticed that 
the salmon’s eyes were like those of a human being. Then he rolled him   
+ See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 24 of this volume. + Some say it was a driftwood log.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 691 
up in a blanket, and hung him in a tree. On the following day he 
unwrapped him, and found that the whole head had become human. On 
the following day the fish had assumed human form down to the waist. On 
the third day he was man down to the knees; and on the fourth day, when 
the blanket was opened, the boy jumped out, saying, ‘It is I, grandfather! Tell no one of my return. Catch and cure all the fish you can, while I 
go and hunt. In two months’ time I shall return, and we shall give a feast 
to the people.” 
Then the old man was glad, and, instead of weeping, and singing dirges, 
he now whistled all day long. The people said, ‘Something must have 
happened to make the old man so happy. He has changed from sadness to gayness very quickly” In two months’ time the fishing-season was over, and the old man had cured many salmon and their roes, and had made much 
oil. Then the lad returned from hunting, carrying one of his mittens full 
of the meat, fat, and skins of deer; while the other contained meat, fat, and skins of marmots. He emptied out the contents of his mittens, and they assumed the form of a large pile of meat, fat, and skins. Then he and his grandfather invited all the people who were surprised to see the boy, and feasted them many days. 
28. GRrisLY BAR'S GRANDCHILDREN.! 
(Fraser River and North Thompson Divisions.) 
An old Grisly Bear woman lived alone in an uninhabited part of the country. She felt very lonely, and desired much to have a daughter. One day she gathered some gum, which she melted; and when it was cool, she fashioned it into the form of a girl. At her command® the figure became alive, and she ordered it to train itself as pubescent girls do, adding, “When you bathe in the stream, do not afterwards dry yourself in the sun. When it is a hot day, always keep in a shady place” The girl did this for a while; but at last she said to herself, “Why does my mother instruct me thus? Tam always cold and miserable” So, one hot day after bathing, she picked out a large flat rock near the stream, and lay down on it to sun herself for a little while. Presently she commenced to melt, stuck to the rock, and was unable to rise. Thus she melted, until there remained only a large pitchy spot on the stone. Her mother discovered her remains, and said, “Alas! my daughter is dead.” Then she fashioned a stone hammer into the form of a girl, and, after endowing it with life, she gave it instructions. She said, “When you bathe, go where the water is shallow. Don't jump off a rock where the water is   
+ See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 21, 32, 77. 2 Some say she put life into it by blowing on it, others say by jumping or  

----

692 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
deep, nor try to swim” After a time the girl wondered at these instructions, 
and thought she would try to swim. Jumping off a rock into deep water, 
she sank to the bottom and was drowned. 
Again Grisly Bear made a daughter, this time from clay, and gave her 
the same instructions as the second one, adding, ‘When you bathe, don't scratch your body” Before long the girl also disobeyed her mother's 
commands, for she thought, “Why should I not scratch myself when there is 
so much dirt.on my skin, and it itches so When bathing in the stream 
one morning, she scratched herself until she was entirely dissolved in the 
water. 
At last Grisly Bear made a daughter of wood; and this one was a success, for she could go in the sun without melting, in the water without sinking, 
and could scratch herself in the water without dissolving. The girl grew into 
a woman, and lived with her mother. One morning she went down to the lake to fetch water and at the 
same time to have a bath. Just then a speckled brook-trout (ste'kesul) jumped 
out of the water; and she remarked, “Oh, how pretty he is! I wish I had 
him for my husband” Soon afterwards she felt a touch on her back, and, 
looking round, saw a handsome man, who said, ‘I am the person you wished 
for a husband. Now, I take you at your word. You must be my wife. 
She was nothing loath, so he put her on his back, and bade her not to 
open her eyes until he told her to. Then he dived with her into the lake, 
but soon she opened her eyes, and they came up again. Again he dived 
with her; but they had not gone much farther when she opened her eyes 
as before. The fourth time he tried, she kept her eyes shut throughout, and 
they reached the land of the fishes, which was at the bottom of the lake, 
on the opposite side from Grisly Bear's house. Here Trout-Man told the 
woman to wait until he went ahead and warned the people. He said, “I 
will send your sisters-inlaw to meet you” 
Soon she saw the latter approach. One of them was the tsoqtci‘tein 
fish,! and her mouth was covered with blood. The other was the Frog, who 
came along making jumps. The girl did not lie their appearance, but 
accompanied them to the large house where all the people were assembled. 
Here in a wide circle sat all the young men, and she was asked to sit down 
beside the one who was her husband. This she found almost impossible to 
do, for they all looked alike, and all were equally handsome. She selected 
one and sat down beside him but the people smiled, and said, “That is not 
your husband” Again she tried, with like result. On the fourth attempt 
she succeeded. She remained many years, and had two children, — a boy 
and a girl When they grew up, the children of Fish and Frog laughed at them   
TA small fab having + red mouth,

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 693 
because they had no grandmother. At last the children asked their mother 
about their grandparents, and she answered, “Yes, you have a grandmother; 
but she lives in another country, very different from this, where there are 
hills, grass, and trees. There she digs roots. They desired to see her: so their mother directed them how to go, and where to find their grand- 
mother's house. : The children travelled up through the water the same way their mother 
had come down, and soon reached their destination. Finding no one in the 
house, and many roots baking in the ashes, they pulled them out and ate them. At last they saw Grisly Bear approaching the house. They 
became afraid, and ran away. When they reached home, their mother was 
angry with them, saying, “Your grandmother will have seen your tracks, and 
have known who you are. You must not disappoint her. She is anxious 
to see you, and will treat you kindly.” Again they went, but with the same 
result. The fourth time their mother had great difficulty in persuading them 
to go, for she was anxious that they should live on the earth, but at last 
they went. 
Meanwhile Grisly Bear had come to know all about it, and had 
arranged accordingly. She went out and set up a tall stick on the hillside, 
hung her basket and robe on it, and told it to dig roots. Then she prepared 
a decoction of herbs in a basket. When the children were in the house, they 
believed that the digging-stick was the old Grisly Bear, and thought that she 
was digging roots on the hillside. Therefore they played unconcernedly. 
Meanwhile Grisly Bear went down unobserved, took her decoction, and 
suddenly she stepped in and threw the contents of the basket at the children. 
The fluid covered ‘the boy, who at once assumed human form; but only a 
few drops of the medicine fell on the girl, and she became transformed into 
a small female dog. 
Now Grisly Bear made a bow and arrows for the boy, who was named 
Chickadee! He amused himself by shooting in the woods. When she gave 
him the arrows, she said to him, ‘If ever the dog runs up and takes away 
or eats what you shoot, do not be angry with her or thrash her” The dog 
became the lad's constant companion, and often it took away or ate up the 
birds and rabbits he shot. 
One day he shot a very fine chickenhawk, and became very angry 
when he saw the dog run ahead and eat it. He took a stick and thrashed the dog severely. The dog howled, and at last said, *O elder brother! why 
treat me thus? Now he recognized that the dog was his younger sister, 
and became very sorry for what he had done. He said, “If I had known 
  
+ His name was Toeki'ks, the same as the Thompson Teeskikik, a variety of chickadee. Although having human form, he also had chickadee characteristics, and was transformed 10 a proper chickadee afierwards.

----

694 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
who you were, I should never have thrashed you’ The dog! ran away, 
and the lad followed it, crying, ‘O my younger sister!®> Oh that I hurt my 
sister” [He followed it until at last it disappeared in the mountains. 
Weeping, he returned to his grandmother, and upbraided her for not telling 
him that the dog was his sister. 
Soon after this, Grisly Bear told the lad that if any of his arrows 
should happen to stick in trees beyond his reach, he must not climb for 
them. Thus he lost many arrows. One day he shot his best arrow at a 
bird that was sitting in a tree. He missed it, and the arrow stuck in a 
branch beyond his reach. He forgot his grandmother's warning and climbed 
to get it; but, just as he was about to grasp it, the tree suddenly grew, and 
took the arrow far beyond his reach. Thus he kept on climbing, until, on 
looking down, he saw that the earth was far below him, and became afraid 
to descend. He climbed from branch to branch, and the tree continued to 
grow until it pierced the sky, and its lower branches were just level with it. 
Only then was the lad able to reach his arrow. He pulled it out, and 
travelled about aimlessly. 
The sky country was a great plain covered lightly with snow, and he 
saw no signs of habitations. He said to himself, “There is no usc wandering thus. 1 will set my arrow on end, and, whichever way it falls, in that 
direction will 1 go” He did so, and travelled the way the arrow had 
indicated, and at last came to some chips, which showed that people had 
been felling a tree. Farther on he came to fresher chips, and at last to a 
lodge with a mat door. 
He entered, and saw a very old man? unable to walk. Before he could 
speak, the old man addressed him, saying, “Welcome, my grandson! I know 
all about you. If you do as I tell you, you will become wise and great. 
I was once your grandmother's husband,‘ and lived on carth. The people 
all live in an underground house close by, where they get water from the 
lake through an icehole. Every day one of them visits me and gives me 
food, water, and fuel. Among them lives a girl, the daughter of the chief, 
who is very good and versed in magic. All the young men are anxious to 
marry her, but she has refused them all. Her father also considers her very 
valuable. If you train yourself as I direct, you will get her for your wife.” 
Then the old man told the lad to get inside of him, and thenceforth he lived 
inside the old man in the daytime, but at night he came out, and the latter 
instructed him in all kinds of wisdom and mystery. Each morning when the 
day dawned, the lad washed himself at the hole where the people drew water,   
+ Some say the sister became transformed. into a chickadee at this time. 3 This is the resson why the chickadee at the present day goes around crying, and call for his younger sister, 3 Some say bis name was Spetlammux, or Spetamildx, which is the same as stewitmu, meaning weed” or “plant” « Some say grandmother's father.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 695 
and immediately afterwards the lad returned and entered the old man, who 
told him that, besides the knowledge that he himself could give him, he 
would receive much wisdom and power from the water, ice, day-dawn, and 
fir-branch. 
Now the people noticed, when they went for water in the morning, 
many frozen drops around the edge of the icehole. They said, “No one 
bathes there, nor leaves the house at night. It must be the old man’ 
Others said, “No, it cannot be, for it is impossible for him to walk” When 
the lad had trained there for some time, the old man asked him if he had 
obtained wisdom, and the lad answered, “I know a little” The old man told him to persevere. After some time the old man asked the same 
question again, and the lad answered that he now knew everything. The 
old man said, ‘It is well. Soon the chief will hold a shooting-match, and 
you will win his daughter.” 
One day the chief said to his people, “The young men are anxious to 
have my daughter. She shall marry some one. Every man shall have a 
fair chance to win her. Nitsaliya® shall sit on the top of the ladder, and 
any one that can hit him with an arrow shall get the girl” Hitherto no 
one had ever been able to hit this bird, for with his magic he always turned 
the arrows aside.! 
Now all the men shot in the presence of the chief; but none of their 
arrows hit. Coyote tried four shots, but, greatly to his disgust, missed each time. He was very anxious to win the prize. 
The chief now said, “Every one has tried except the old man. Bring him here” Coyote laughed, saying, “When even I have missed, how can an old 
blind man, not able to siand, hit the mark? However, they carried the 
old man to the place, and supported him when he got ready to shoot. He 
said, “How can I shoot when I cannot see” But the chief insisted that he 
should try. The old man then turned his head aside, as if taking aim, drew 
his bow, and the arrow sped straight to the heart of Nitsa'iya, who fell down 
dead. The people were all disgusted; but the chief made his daughter take 
her blanket and go live with the old man. 
When night came, the lad came out of the old man, and lay down 
beside the girl, who was very much pleased. One night some people heard 
him speaking to his wife, and said, “That is not the old man's voice.” They 
also remarked that the girl was wonderfully contented. One day they went 
to the old man’s lodge, thinking to annoy and shame his wife. They said, 
“All the people go hunting to-day: the old man must go too. The girl said, 
“All right!” and, rolling him up in a blanket, she carried him along. When   
+ A smal variety of owl. + For this reason the Shuswap ued always 10 blow on their arrow before shooting at an owl, particularly of this specics. If they did not do this, they would certainly miss.

----

696 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the party arrived at the place where they were to separate, the old man 
said that he had no arrows. The others laughed, and cach gave him an 
arrow. Some gave him good ones, others gave him poor ones, and Coyote 
gave him one of bark feathered with leaves. When the hunters were out of 
sight, the lad came out of the old man’s body, took the arrows, ran ahead, and gathered the deer all into one place, where he killed them, leaving the 
arrows in their bodies. Then he returned, and re-entered the old man. The 
hunters came home in the evening without having seen any deer. 
The old man said, “You could not see any deer because I killed them 
all. If you go to the place where I was, you will find as many dead deer 
as 1 had arrows. Each carcass shall belong to the owner of the arrow that 
is in it” The people went, and found the deer as the old man had told 
them. Those who had given good arrows to the old man found nice fat 
bucks; those who had given him arrows not quite so good, found does; those 
who had given him poor arrows found yearlings; and Coyote found only a 
small fawn. Coyote tried to claim some of the arrows in the large carcasses 
as his; but the owners beat him off and made him take his own. Now the 
people became curious, and questioned the girl, who explained it all. So they killed the old man, and cut him up; but they had to cut him in very 
small pieces before they succeeded in separating the lad from his body. 
The young man lived for a long time with his wife in the upper world, and 
afterwards was transformed into a bird, the chickadee. He was a great 
deer-hunter. 
20. STORY OF ELKWA'. 
A number of people’ lived together on a large open plain, through the middle of which, flowed a river of some size. They were a cruel and warlike 
people, and their chief was a noted shaman and warrior called tkwa'. They 
lived in a great long lodge which had a door at cach end, and was situated 
quite close to the base of a high knoll which commanded a view of the 
surrounding country for a great distance. From the top of the knoll a 
constant watch was kept by mlkwa’s men, who relieved each other. Below 
the lodge, at no great distance, was the river, in which elkwa’s people caught 
salmon, and across which they had constructed two weirs. The weirs were also used as bridges. 
In the neighboring country lived a numerous people divided into bands, who suffered much from raids made by Elkwd’. War-parties that these people 
sent against him never returned, for so watchful was he that they could not 
approach without being detected and ambushed.   
1 These people had mysterious powers, snd were difirent from the ordinary people of the country. # See Vol. 1 of this series, Fig. 142, p. 197. .

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 697 
One band, consisting of many of the birds and animals, held a council 
to consider what to do. Grisly Bear was their chief, and he addressed them 
as follows: “slkws’ has almost exterminated many bands of our people, and 
we ourselves have suffered much at his hands. Let us make war upon him. 
Who will go with me” Fox! volunteered first, then Elk? Sheep, Wolf, and all the others. Coyote said, “Warlike powers alone cannot prevail over 
our enemy. It requires much wisdom and magic. Iam wisest, and have 
the greatest mysterious power among all the people; the Goat and I can 
combat the elements. Without us you cannot win. We will go also, and 
give valuable aid” : 
When the war-party had nearly reached the edge of the plain, they held 
a consultation. Coyote, by his magic, made rtkwa’ fall into an unsuspicious, 
careless mood, and then he caused a blizzard to blow across the plain. The 
warriors considered the snow to be too fine; therefore the Goat danced, and 
at once a thick shower of large snowflakes commenced to fall, and the party were satisfied. It was still noon, and they had to wait until night before 
making the attack: therefore Tcrki'ksé? said, “Meanwhile I will go to the 
enemy's house and learn all particulars regarding its construction and 
situation, how the people lie, and where their chief sleeps” He hovered over the lodge, flying here and there; and the people said, “Sec that bird! 
No birds ever came here before. There is something wrong. stkwa, who 
was lying down, answered. “That is nothing. These birds arrive in the late 
fall to eat salmon.” Now the cold became so intense, the wind so strong, and the snow so 
thick on the knoll, that the watchmen had to retire and seek the shelter of the lodge. They could barely see the river through the thick snow. 
After Terki'ksé returned, the warriors said, “We are hungry, and have 
nothing to eat” Therefore they selected the Wolf, who was fieetest of foot, 
to go and steal some salmon from between the weirs of the enemy, Frkwi’s 
people saw him, and shouted, ‘Sec the Wolf! He is stealing salmon! 
Something is wrong. Wolves never came so close before.” Elkw#, who was 
still lying on his back, answered, “That is nothing. Wolves always come to 
eat salmon in the late fall.” 
Wolf brought back some salmon, but not enough to appease the hunger 
of the party: so they sent Black Bear, who went, and returned with a load. 
The people saw him, and remarked, “See! Black Bear is stealing salmon! 
There is something wrong. Bears never came so near before” But stkwa’ 
said, “That is nothing. Don't you know bears always come to eat salmon 
late in the fall” At midnight the war-party crossed the river by the two 
    
1 Some say Coyote. + Some say Gost. A chickadee. He was the best scout and. spy of the pay

----

698 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP.    weirs, and, joining on the opposite bank, were conducted to the house by 
Teeki’ksé. Surrounding it, they attacked from both doors, Tceki’ksé entering 
first, and killing Etkwd’ where he slept. Then they slew all the others, and 
thus rid the country of those bad people. 
30. STORY OF OwL! 
Owl was a man possessed of mysterious powers, and a noted hunter. 
He lived by himself. A long distance away from Owl's house lived a number 
of people, among whom were a woman and her son, a small boy. As the 
latter was always crying about nothing, and thus annoying all the people, 
his mother threatened to cast him out, saying she would ask Owl to come 
and put him in his basket. 
One night the boy was crying as usual, and his mother became angry, 
and threw him into a dark corner of the house, saying that Owl would come 
and take him. After a time the people noticed that the boy had ceased 
crying, and thought he had fallen asleep. The mother went to look for him, but could not find him. Then the people took torches and searched for 
him, but in vain. He was not to be found. Owl had carried him away in 
his basket, the bottom of which was set with many awls, which were stuck 
in points up. Owl travelled a long ways with the boy, and commenced to train him. 
Every day he washed him in streams, and rubbed his body with fir-branches, 
so that the boy grew very fast and became wise. Owl gave him a bow and 
arrows, and taught him to shoot mice, the skins of which he stretched and 
dressed, leaving them in their drying-frames when they changed their camp 
on the following morning. 
At their next camp he made him shoot chipmunks and squirrels, the 
skins of which he also dressed and left in their frames. At the third camp 
he made him kill rabbits, the skins of which he treated in the same way. 
At their fourth camp the boy was able to shoot fawns and other small deer; 
and thus at each succeeding camp he shot larger game, — does and buck- 
deer, then clk and caribou, then bear. At last they reached a very distant 
place, where Owl made a house; and there they lived together. The boy 
had grown to be a man and an expert hunter, killing many deer and other 
game, which Owl always carried home. 
Now, the lad's parents thought Owl had taken him, and made up their 
minds to search for their lost son. Soon they found his trail, and came to 
the camp where he had shot the mice. They saw all the miceskins in 
frames, and said, ‘Undoubtedly our son made them’ Thus they followed   
+ See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 63; Farrand, Traditions of the Chileotin Indians, 36 of this volume.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 699 
from one camp to another until they at last reached the place where the 
youth lived with Owl. Thinking they might be discovered, they returned, 
and camped halfway between Owl's house and the camp where their son had 
become able to shoot bears. 
Both Owl and the lad knew by their mysterious power that these people 
had arrived; and at night the lad stole away and visited them, making himself 
known to them, and supplying them with some fresh meat. Owl knew what 
had happened, and asked the lad why he acted as he had done, and why 
he had given away his (Owl's) meat. The lad answered, ‘I gave nothing, 
grandfather. If you look at your meat, you will find just the same quantity 
as before.” The following night, after dark, the lad visited his parents again, 
and told them he would flee with them on the morrow. Early in the morning 
the lad went hunting with Owl, killed a buck-deer, which he gutted, and 
made a packingline of the entrails. He told the entrails to break every 
little while when Owl used them for packing.! Then he called Owl by cries,’ 
and pointed out to him the place where the deer lay, and told him that 
there was a new packing-strap fastened to it by which he could carry it 
home. He also told Owl that he intended to hunt for some time longer, 
as the day was yet young. As soon as he was out of Owl's sight, he 
hurried back to the house, from which he took enough dried meat to last 
several days. Then he set fire to the house, joined his parents, and together 
they fled. 
Now, Owl had much trouble in carrying the buck home, for the line 
always broke, and he had to stop to mend it. He became angry, and said, 
“Why is this?” As he came near his house, he saw that it was on fire, and 
the flames of the burning fat and meat were blazing high up into the air. 
He said, “Why is this? What has my grandchild done?” When he arrived, 
everything was burned; only a few charred deer’s bones remained. 
He followed the tracks of the lad, and soon began to catch up with the 
fugitives. The lad’s parents were afraid when they saw Owl drawing near; 
but their son re-assured them, saying, “Be not afraid! 1 have received much 
magic power from Owl. Now the pupil is greater than his teacher, for I know more magic than he does” When Owl came near, the lad turned 
round and transformed him, saying, “Henceforth you shall be only an ordinary 
owl, and no more a being of magic power. You shall only be a little wiser than others, and able to give warning when people are about to die.* 
  
* For a similar incident of tumpline made of guts, see the story of Nivkisentem (Tel, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 26). For cries or calls used by hunters, see Vol. 1 of this series, p. 287. > That the owl gives warning of death, is a belief held by all the interior Salish tribes, who also frighten their children to quietness By saying, “The owl will come and take you if you cry.”

----

700 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
31. Storv or Fame! or Huscer. 
Hunger or Famine was a man with a lean body, hollow cheeks, sunken 
orbits, protruding eyes, projecting jaws and teeth, and long fingernails. He 
lived on the top of a high mountain which had sloping sides devoid of trees 
or bushes, so that he could sce all the slopes of the mountain from top to 
bottom, except in one place halfway up, where there was a projecting bench 
over the edge of which he could not see. On this bench, which was open 
and of considerable area, lived the deer. 
Not far from the base of the mountain, at one time lived a large number 
of people, but they had been almost exterminated by Famine. The men 
went in twos and threes to hunt deer on the bench above; but, as soon as 
their heads appeared over the edge of the bench, Famine drew their heads 
to himself, and they at once died. Thus their bleached bones covered the 
side-hill along the edge of the bench. At last no males were left among 
the people except an old man, Owl, and his grandson, a very small boy 
called Téki¢'teen.? 
When the latter reached the age of puberty, he asked his grandfather 
why there were no men; and the old man told him how they had all met 
their deaths at the hands of Famine, adding, “You must now train yourself, 
and sleep on the mountains, so you may become wise, and strong in magic 
power, and be able to avenge the death of your relatives” So the lad left, 
and took up his abode in the mountains. 
After he had been away a while, Owl cried, “Hu xa hu ht’ Where 
are you, grandson?” And the lad answered, *I am here! I am training 
hard, and am just beginning to know a little” Owl was satisfied. After a 
considerable time he again cried, “Where are you, grandson? Do you know 
much yet” And the lad answered, ‘I am here, grandfather, and have gained 
some wisdom.” After a long time Owl again called to the lad, who answered 
that he now knew very much. A fourth time Owl cried to the lad, who 
answered that he was now proficient in all magic powers and knew everything. 
Then the lad came home, and told Owl he was going to kill Famine. 
Transforming himself into a humming-bird, he flew towards the place where 
the deer lived; but Famine was always on the watch, and had wonderfully 
keen eyesight! As soon as the lad appeared over the edge of the bench, Famine saw him, tried to draw his breath away, and the lad had to retreat. 
Then he changed himself into a bee, and again approached the place; 
  
+ See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 32 of this volume. * Said to mean “dream,” or “similar to a dream.” + These words are an imitation of the cry of owls. + Some say he could see just as well in the dark as in the light.  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 701 
but Famine at once saw him, and he had to beat a retreat. Then he 
changed himself into a horse-fly, but had to retreat again. Again he changed 
himself, this time into a mosquito; but Famine saw him, as before. Then he 
changed himself into a black or deer fly, but with like result. At last he 
changed himself into a sand-fly or midge, and looked over the edge of the 
flat at the deer. Famine was watching, but showed no signs of being able 
to see him: so he flew up to the deer and entered their nostrils, one after 
another, and thus killed them all. Famine was watching with strained eyes, 
and wondering why the deer fell down dead, one after another. Then the 
lad flew to Famine, and bit him all around the head; but Famine, being 
able only to feel him and not to see him, wondered what it was. When he 
had annoyed Famine for some time, he entered his nostrils, and thus killed him. Owl was anxious at the long delay of his grandson, and called out, 
asking him where he was. As the lad did not answer, he thought he was 
dead, went outside, and began to weep. Now, the lad, still in the form of a 
midge. bit Owl's face. Owl tried to find out what touched his face, but could 
not see anything. Again he wept, and cried, “Oh! where are you, grandchild» 
Then the lad assumed his natural form, and answered, ‘I am here by your 
side, grandfather. 1 have just returned from killing our enemy Famine and 
all his deer” — “Well done!” said Owl. 
The boy returned to the mountain, took Famine's body, and threw it 
away, saying, ‘Famine, henceforth you shall be no more a being of mysterious 
power, and you shall never be able to kill people as long as they have food 
to eat. Occasionally you may hurt them when their food is all gone; but 
as soon as they get more food and eat, you will have to leave” Then, 
going to the hillside where the men's bones were lying, he jumped over 
cach skeleton, and they all came, to life, went with the lad, cut up the deer, 
and carried the meat to their homes. 
32. Srory or THE Moon AND mis Wives! 
The Moon lived in a distant country, which was cold and largely covered with snow and ice. In another country, which was warm, lived a number of people, among whom were four sisters. The Moon visited these people, and asked for the eldest sister to be his wife. Her relatives consented, and upon his return he took her home with him. 
For a time she was quite comfortable, for the Moon had his house in 
a temperate spot; but one day he told her they were going to move to his 
new house, which was a cavern in a glacier or snow-field, with icicles hanging 
from the roof. When they reached this place, he put the woman inside, 
shut up the entrance, and left her to freeze to death.   
See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 55.

----

702 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Then he returned to her people and told them that his wife had died, 
and asked for her sister next in age to be his wife. He took her home, 
but treated her in the same manner as the first one, and froze her to death 
in his icehouse. Again he returned to the people, told them of his second wife's death, and received from them the third sister as his wife, whom he 
killed in the same manner as the others. Now, the youngest sister, who had a lame leg, thought there was 
something wrong; and, as soon as her sister left with the Moon, she went to the mountains and trained herself as shamans do. Soon she became very 
wise, and saw, through her shamanistic power, what had been the fate of 
her sisters. She understood the designs of the Moon. 
She had just finished her training when the Moon came along, and said 
to the people, “My last wife is dead. 1 desire my remaining sister-in-law to 
be my wife” She went with him, and before long accompanied him to his 
new house, as the others had done. On the way thither he said to himself, 
“I will kill this one too, thus I shall gain complete mastery over these 
people, who love warm weather; and I will make much cold and ice in their 
country, so that they will all die”! The woman entered the ice-cavern and 
sat down. She looked up at the roof, and the icicles at once melted. She 
looked steadily; and the roof of the house, then the house itself, and finally 
the whole country, melted before her gaze. The air became warm like a 
Chinook wind; and, aided by the sun, everything thawed out, and the country 
became as if it were spring. Thus the lame sister? thwarted the Moon, and 
saved the people from being frozen to death, or from having to live in snow 
and ice, and suffering much cold. 
  33. STORY OF Sna'NaZ 
Sna'naz was the youngest of four brothers who lived together with their 
father. Near by lived many people, including Coyote. Snanaz was an 
unassuming youth, and, moreover, was ugly and had very large eyes. At 
that time the wind was very fierce and destructive, blowing very hard at 
times, and even killing people. For this reason the people tried to snare 
it; but, although they had been trying for a long time, none of them had 
succeeded. The brothers tried, but they also failed. Thus every one had 
  
Some say the Moon belonged to the Cold Wind or North-Wind people, and he wished. all the people of the earth to be the same. 4 Some say that she was a Shuswap, and others that she was a daughter of the Chinook Wind or Warm Wind people. 3 This story is ofien told in two paris by the Shuswap the first part dealing with the capture of the wind by’ Soa'naz, and the later part relating his adventures in the underground world, commencing with the sealing of potatoes. The name Sna'ntz may mean “litle robes” but some Indians seem to think it is & variation of 8 name for fowl  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 703 
failed, and it was now Sma'naz's turn to try. The people all laughed at him 
when he went out to set his snare, and said, “When all of us have failed, 
how can an ugly, miserable know-nothing fellow like him succeed” Three 
times he set his snare, each time making it smaller; and the people made 
fun of him. The fourth night he made his snare exceedingly small, and was rewarded by finding the Wind caught in the morning. It was like a 
very small man with very thin body and limbs; while its head was large, 
and had long, stiff streaming hair, thus making the head part appear of 
enormous size. The eyes were large and protruding. He hid the Wind in 
his robe and carried it home, for it was quite light. The people were glad 
that their enemy had been caught, and a crowd of them followed Sna'naz 
when he went to release it. He went to an exposed hillside, and laid his 
robe down. 
Coyote, who did not believe that Sna'naz had caught the Wind, tried 
to peer into the robe, and watched very closely. All the other people stood 
behind at some distance. After Sna‘naz had made the Wind promise to blow 
moderately in the future, he opened the robe; and the Wind, rushing out, 
blew Coyote into the air, where he turned over and over, and up and down. 
Coyote held on first to the grass and bushes, then to the trees; but the 
Wind was so strong that it blew him off, and landed him in the middle of 
a swampy lake, where he held on to the rushes, and called on Sna‘naz to save him. The latter helped him out, and they went home together. Since 
then the wind has never blown as hard as formerly, and often never 
blows at all." It now came to be early spring, and the waterfowl arrived on their 
way north. The ice still clung to the edges of the lakes, and the people 
had very little food left. One day a large number of swans arrived, and 
the people said, “Who can bewitch the swans so that they may become 
heavy, and we can catch them? Coyote and all the shamans tried, and 
also Sna'naz's brothers, but without result. Then Sna'naz said he would try. 
The brothers laughed at the idea; but their father said, ‘Let him try. He 
is greater in magic than you are’ The swans were sitting near the cdge 
of the ice, and Sna'naz approached them, as a shaman would, with incan- 
tations. They became so heavy that they were unable to fly; and Sna‘naz 
clubbed them all, and killed them. He tied them together, carried them 
home, and the people ate their fl. 
Shortly after this the people were starving again, and made holes through 
the ice to spear fish, but they did not see any. Then Snanaz went, and 
struck his foot four times on the ice. The water bounded up each time, 
  
§ Compare the preceding pant with Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 87; Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 42 of this volume.

----

704 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
and threw large quantities of fish on the ice. He tied them on a string, carried them home, and the people had plenty. to cat until the weather grew quite warm. Then they shifted camp, and hunted deer.! 
Now, Sna‘naz's father had a garden near his house, in which he grew 
potatoes. For some time he had missed some of his potatoes every morning, 
and had noticed the tracks of the thief. The tracks seemed to come from 
nowhere, and to lead nowhere: so he was unable to follow them. Now the brothers watched for the thief. The first night the eldest watched, but fell asleep toward daybreak; and when he awoke, he found the fresh tracks of 
the thief, and more potatoes gone. Then the second and third brothers watched, but with like result. When Sna‘naz essayed to watch, the others laughed at the idea of his being able to detect the thief. ‘He, however, sharpened one end of a thin pole, stuck it loosely into the ground, and then sat down, resting his shoulders against the blunt end. Thus he sat watching. Whenever he fell asleep, the pole fell over, and he awoke. Just about daybreak he saw a very large black object among the potatoes, fired at it, and wounded it. It got up and flew away. Snanaz watched until he saw 
it alight far away on the ridge of a mountain. He watched the place until the daylight was bright enough for him to recognize the exact spot. 
Then he went to the house, and informed his friends that he had shot 
the thief. He asked his brothers to accompany him to the spot where he 
had seen it alight. He said, ‘I dreamed of a hole in the ground. We will take a long rope with us” 
After travelling a long distance, and camping two nights, they reached the place, and found the thief's tracks where he had alighted. They followed these, and came to a chasm in the rocky ground, to which the tracks led. Then the brothers tied a rope around Sna‘naz, and lowered him down the hole, promising to pull him up again when he tugged. After he had been lowered a long distance, they felt a tug, and pulled him up again. He 
told them the hole was very bad, rocky, deep, and dark, but he was 
determined to reach the bottom. The brothers lowered him again, and he 
reached the bottom, where he tied the end of the rope to a rock. 
He found himself in the Lower World, and saw a wide trail leading 
away from the hole. On it were the tracks, two or three days old, of a 
large man. Following these, he soon came to a brush lodge, lifted the mat 
door, and looked in. Everything inside was covered with soot, and in one comer lay an old man under a robe, which was also sootcovered. He noticed a bullet-wound through the man's shoulder, and he thought to himself, “This is evidently the thief I shot.” 
As soon as he had entered the lodge, the old man asked him whence 
  
+ The preceding pact is often told as a separate sory.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 705 
he had come, and he answered, “Oh, I am just travelling around to see the 
country” — “Well” said the old man, “if you continue along the trail, before long you will come to the house of our chief. He is great in magic 
power, and has two. beautiful nieces.! Perhaps he may be pleased to see you.” 
Sna'naz soon reached the house of the chief, who gave him food to eat, and asked him whither he was bound. Sna'naz answered, ‘I am a poor lad, and 
wander around the country seeking wisdom. I hear you are a great chief, 
and 1 desire to learn wisdom from you. I have nothing to eat, and you 
have much food. I should like to remain with you for a time. If you will 
give me food, I will fetch wood and water for you” Sna'naz lived with the 
chief a long time, and learned much wisdom from him. 
At last one day the chief said to him, “You may perhaps like to go to 
the other world and see your friends. You have worked for me a long 
time, and I have paid you nothing but your food. I like you, because you 
have acted so faithfully, and behaved so well. I give you my two nieces 
to be your wives. You may take them whenever you wish Snanaz said 
he would like to go to see his friends. Then the chief gave him his nieces 
and a very light box to carry. 
When they arrived at the bottom of the entrance to the Upper World, 
Sna'naz tied the box to the end of the rope, and put one of his wives 
inside. He gave the rope a tug, and his brothers pulled the woman up. 
Then they lowered the box again, pulled up the other woman, and finally 
lowered the box for Sna'naz. He climbed into the box, and his brothers 
began to haul him up; but when he was halfway up, his brothers cut the 
rope, and he fell to the bottom of the chasm. They wanted to kill Sna'naz 
because they coveted his wives. 
Sna‘naz was badly hurt by the fall, but managed to crawl to the old 
man's lodge. After resting there, he went on to the chiefs house, and 
related what had happened; and the chief invited him to stay until he became 
well, when he would help him. 
When Snamaz was well again, the chief gave him a roll of birch-bark 
with a picture on it? saying, ‘I give you this. You can change it to a 
horse when desired. 1 will now teach you two wonderful feats” He stuck 
the point of a knife into the ground, with the handle sloping away from 
Sna'maz, whom he told to transform his “picture” into a horse, and ride up 
over the edge of the knife. Sna‘naz threw the “picture’ on the ground, and 
it became a horse, on which he mounted and rode at full tilt to and over the knife. Now the chief made the slant of the knife steeper, and Sna‘naz rode over it as before. Again he made it steeper, and again Sna‘naz rode 
  
+ Some say daughters. Others say they were girls whom he had stolen from the Upper World; that is from the earth. # Some say a piece of paper with a picture on it. Others say a piece of bark or paper with writing 50 it.

----

706 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
over it. The fourth time he made it perpendicular. Sna‘naz whipped up 
his horse, galloped up over the sharp edge of the knife, and disappeared 
over the top of the hilt. The chief said, “It is well. You are proficient.” 
Then he took a small ring, and set it on its side, with a needle? so 
placed that the point was just in the middle of the ring. Then the chief asked Sna'naz to ride his horse through the ring. Sna‘naz charged at the 
ring, and rode right through it. Four times he accomplished this feat; and 
the chief said, “You are proficient. You may now go.” 
Then Sna'naz left the chief, and, on reaching the bottom of the chasm, he rode his horse up its perpendicular walls, climbling to the top without 
difficulty. Then he rode to the village of the people, changed his horse 
back to a roll of birch-bark, and himself to a ragged, dirty, famished- 
looking person. 
While all this was happening, his brothers, thinking Sna‘naz had been 
killed, kept the women for themselves, and agreed to say that they had 
brought them from the Lower World, and that Sna'naz had been killed by 
their uncle. When they reached the village, the people came to see them; 
and the chief asked them where they had obtained the women. They 
answered as they had agreed. The women, however, told the chief the true 
story! who told the brothers that the girls would remain with him in his house. The brothers said, “Why act thus? The women are ours. We went 
to the Lower World with our brother, and fought the people there. Our 
brother was killed in the battle, and we took these women from our enemies. 
They stand as payment for our brother, and, being captives of war, they are 
our property. We won them by our deeds” The chief answered, “They are the same as belonging to you, yet I will have charge of them for a 
litle while, until they become accustomed to us and to our ways” The 
girls staid with the chief, and told him many things about their world, — 
how the people there had the power of making themselves so small that they 
could jump or ride through a fingering; how they had the power of mak- 
ing themselves invisible; how they could also shorten distances, transport 
themselves through the air, and run or ride over the sharp edges of knives 
and up steep clifis. The chief said, “I will some time test my people to find 
out if they are capable of doing these feats.” 
Now Sna'naz came to the chief's house, and no one recognized him. 
He pretended to be very poor, and asked the chief to give him food and 
rest, saying that, when he got well, he would fetch wood and water for him. 
  
  Some say a finger about the size of one. + Some say sn awl. # Some say the girls ran away from the brothers, and took refuge in the chief's house, and told him the story. The brothers went to claim them, but the chief would not give them up. ng of metal; others that it is doubtfl whether it was & fnger.ring, but that it was

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 707 
Shortly after this, the chief announced that he would give a feast to the people and have games. First he placed the point of a large knife in the 
ground, and asked the men to try and run up over the edge of it. Some 
of them tried on foot, and cut their feet. Others tried to ride up the knife 
on horseback, and hurt their horses. Coyote managed to get far up the 
blade, when his horse, missing his footing, fell, and cut himself right in two. 
Then the chief placed a fingering, with a needle pointing at the middle, 
and asked his men to jump or ride through it. They all tried, but the best 
of them could manage to get only half through. Coyote got farthest through, 
and stuck on the point of the needle. 
Then the chief asked Sna‘naz to try; and the people all laughed, saying, 
“How can a fellow like him do these feats, when all of us have failed? He 
does not know anything. If he were wise, he would have a house of his 
own, and not have to work or beg for his food” Sna'maz said, ‘I am 
certainly very foolish, and know little. Yet, if you wish, I will try to do 
the feats” Then he went to a place where he was out of sight, took out 
his roll of bark, changed it into a horse, and appeared again among the 
people. Full speed he rode up to the knife, went up over the edge, and 
disappeared. After he had accomplished this feat, he rode full speed through 
the ring, the needle only pricking his leg. The people were astonished; and 
the chief said, “He must belong to the Lower World” The girls, who were looking on, said, “Yes, indeed, he must be one of our people” Then 
Sna'naz resumed his natural appearance, and the people all recognized him. 
The girls said, “He is our husband His brothers felt ashamed, and avoided 
him. The chief returned his wives to him, and he lived with them happily, 
having many children by them, all of whom became noted for magic. 
34. Story oF Xowisst'sest.? 
Four hunters lived in the mountains with their sister, whose name was 
Sosi'ska. She was very small, — only about a foot tall, — and when 
digging roots carried four baskets made by her brothers, each one an elk’s 
hoof. When she filled her baskets, she hurried home and cooked the roots, 
to be ready for her brothers when they should arrive. Her dog was the 
Louse, which she always led by a string. It was very small, and so slow 
that she had great trouble in leading it along. She talked to it much; and 
when they came to a bunch of grass, she would say, “Friend Louse, come 
around the grassroots. The grass is too high for you to jump over.” 
One day there appeared to Sosiska four very large, good-looking 
  
1 Some say he also offered to give the girls to whoever could accomplish the fests. 4 See Tei, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 72 et seq.

----

708 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
women, with faces painted yellow, who asked her what she was doing. She 
answered, I am digging roots for my brothers.” — “How many brothers have 
you? they asked. She answered, ‘Four’ — “Very well” said they. ‘We 
will give you roots for your brothers to eat; but you must tell them to eat 
them whole, and never to break any.” They filled her baskets with 
cinquefoil-roots (xi'lehil), in the heart of each one of which they had inserted 
a hair from their privates. Sési'ska cooked the roots, and her brothers ate 
them that night. 
Four times the woman appeared to Sbési‘ska, and filled her baskets. 
On the fourth night the brothers asked her how she managed to gather so 
many large roots now, when formerly she could only dig a few small ones; 
and one of them, on breaking a root in two, saw the hair in the inside. 
They said, “These roots are different from those you used to dig.” Then 
Sési'ska told how she got them from four women; and they said, “They 
must be the Grisly Bears, for we constantly see their tracks where they have 
been digging roots.” 
Some time after this, the brothers came home early one night. When 
they reached the place where their sister was engaged in digging roots, she 
told them that she had seen four Grisly Bears on the nearest hillside. The 
brothers took their arrows, and said, ‘We will go and kill them. We will 
hang our quivers on the branch of a tree within your view; and if you see 
them fall, you will know that the Grisly Bears have killed us.” 
Sbsi'ska watched, and saw first one quiver fall, and then another, until 
all had fallen. Then she knew that her brothers had been killed, and she 
went home weeping. She made a fire, and again wept bitterly; and the 
water ran out of her nose and eyes. 
She blew her nose into the fire, and immediately there was a cry like 
that of a baby. She saw that the mucus from her nose had become a child, 
and she snatched it out of the fire, shook it, and brushed the cinders and 
ashes off its body. She nursed it, and made a carrier for it; and in due 
time the baby grew to be a big boy, and began to train himself. Then she 
told him the story of the Grisly Bears, and showed him where his uncles, 
quivers lay. He resolved to have revenge. 
The boy trained himself until he was full grown. Although a man of 
very small stature, he was possessed of great courage. His name was Little- 
Mucus-Stone (Xonissé'sest)." 
Now he made four arrows of great magic power, searched for the Grisly 
Bears, who had hidden themselves in the bushes, and one by one found 
them and shot them dead. He said, “Henceforth Grisly Bears shall no more 
  
| “Mucus of the nose” (from 3onlsem, “to blow the nose”). The later part of the word forms & common, suffix for men's names, and means “stone.” In this particular case it has the diminutive form.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 709 
have magic power, and hunters shall kill them.” Then he went to the quivers, jumped over' them, and his uncles came to life, and afterwards lived with 
him and his mother. 
35. Mosquito AND THUNDER. 
[This tradition is identical with the corresponding tale of the Thompson Indians] 
36. Story oF Kuxkan.t 
A number of people lived together, and among them was a boy who 
was a nuisance to every one. He was disobedient, lazy, and mischievous. The people made up their minds to leave him, saying, “It will cither kill 
him or make a man of him’ One day a few lads induced him to accompany 
them into the woods, and there they scattered, and left him. He was too 
lazy to follow them around. After the boys got out of sight, they spat on 
the ground, and bade their spittle to whistle. Meanwhile the people packed 
up all their belongings and went off to the mountains. Toward evening the 
boy, whose name was Kuxkain, noticed that the whistling was getting faint, 
and went in search of his companions. At last he found that there were no 
boys, but that the sound of whistling came from the ground; so he hastened 
home, only to find all the houses deserted. He searched around, but he 
could find nothing to eat. 
One woman, however, had taken pity on him, and, before leaving, had 
lighted a slow-match of bark. and covered it with a basket. She left for 
him fire, sinew, a hammer, and ‘a basket. She had placed her stone hammer 
on top of the basket, and had instructed it to speak to the boy. When 
Kuxka'in entered this house, the hammer addressed him, saying, My owner 
instructed me to tell you that she had pity on you, and left a slow-match 
underneath this basket, so that you may have a fire. She also left some 
sinew to make a bowstring and to tie feathers on your arrows, so that you 
may shoot game and get food.” Kuxka'in was glad when he heard the words of the hammer. He used 
it to split firewood, and then made a bow and arrow, with which he shot 
small game, and thus obtained food. After a while he managed to shoot 
larger game, and he became a good hunter. 
In gratitude he filled the woman's house with meat and skins, which 
he gave her as a present when the people returned, and he also gave her 
  
+ Some say he jumped over their bones as well # See Tei, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 56. * Thi the name of bid which 1 had 00 oppo 1 nde (ii 3-511

----

710 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
back her hammer. To the other people he gave no presents, because they 
had taken no pity on him. Kuxkain thenceforth lived well with all the 
people, and was no more a nuisance. 
37. STORY oF Hu'rken.! 
Hu'pken® was a lad who lived with his parents, but would do nothing 
they told him. He was very mischievous, lazy, and quarrelsome, and would 
not train himself like other lads. As he was a nuisance to the people, his 
parents arranged to desert him at the first opportunity. 
One day the boy went off into the woods and lay down in the shade, 
as he felt very lazy, and thought his parents might send him to do some work, When he returned home at sundown, he found the houses all deserted, 
so he started to follow the people's tracks and learn where they had gone. 
He said, “They cannot be far away, for I hear them whistling” He went in 
the direction of the sound, but next time it came from another quarter, — 
sometimes in front of him, then behind him, sometimes distant, and again 
close. Soon he became weary of following the sound, which really came from 
the excrements of the people, and, as it was getting dark, he returned to 
the village. 
He entered onc house after another, feeling very angry and disconsolate: 
He could find nothing to eat, except in the houses of Raven and Crow, who 
had left some fish-skins and other scraps. In the last house he noticed a 
large basket turned mouth down, and, feeling angry, he kicked it over, 
saying, “Why did the people not take this with them also?” 
He was surprised to find his old grandmother hidden underneath. She 
was too old to follow the people, and they had left her behind. He was 
going to kick her also, but she said to him, “Do not kick me! I will be of 
service to you, and will teach you many things. Here is a lighted slow- match. Kindle a fire with it.” 
Then the old woman taught him how to make bows and arrows, and 
shoot game, that they might have food and clothing. At first he shot mice, rats, chipmunks, and squirrels; and the old woman sewed their skins together 
and made robes. Then he shot many brightplumaged birds, and she also sewed their skins into robes. On sunny days the lad delighted in spreading 
out all his many robes in the sunshine, and admiring them. At last he was 
able to shoot large game, such as deer, sheep, elk, and bears, and he soon 
had great stores of skins, fat, and meat. 
Now Porcupine happened to come along. When he saw the large 
  
1 A small variety of bird which attacks other birds. 1 had no chance to identify it. 3 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 26, 51.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 711 
amount of provisions the lad had collected, he hurried away to the people's 
camp, and told them that Hu'pken was now a great hunter, and had large 
stores of meat and fat, and many beautiful robes. The people would not 
believe Porcupine’s story, and sent Crow to verify the report. 
When Crow arrived, Hu'pken invited him to eat, and asked him how 
the people fared. Crow said, “We have found very little game, and are all 
starving” When he returned, Hupken gave him a present of fat to carry 
to the people; but Crow hid it and told the people that Porcupine had lied 
about the lad, who was just as poor as when they left him. During the 
night Crow got up and fed his children with some of the fat. The children 
quarrelled over the food, and made much noise as they ate; and the people, 
hearing them, said, “Crow is feeding his children secretly.” 
Crow returned to Hupken and got more fat, which he fed to his 
children, so that they became fat and sleek. Then the people said, “Crow 
must feed his children on good food, for they are getting fat, while our 
children are getting thin. We know he is no hunter, and cannot kill game. Where does he obtain his supply” They sent Flying-Squirrel to watch Crow. 
He clad himself in black moss, and, keeping in the timber, walked along 
unobserved, and watched Crow's camp. Seeing Crow's children eating fat’, he returned and informed the people, who asked Crow where he got it, and 
‘he acknowledged that he received it from Hu'pken. The people then 
returned to their village, where they were feasted by the lad. Hu'pken 
had filled the houses of Crow and others who had left him food, but he put 
no meat into the houses of those who had not pitied him. 
38. Dmrv-Lap axp ms Wives? 
There was once a lad who was very lazy, always dirty, and covered 
with lice. The people tried to make him work and keep clean, but without 
avail: so they became disgusted and angry with him, and turned him away. 
He travelled around aimlessly, and at last came to a lodge where he saw 
two blind women? They were Elk women, and one was handing food to 
the other. He took the food from the woman, and the other woman asked her friend why she had not given her the food. The other answered, “I 
gave it to you. You took it out of my hand” The other woman denied 
having received it, and they began to quarrel. 
Suddenly one of the women sniffed the air, and said to her friend, 
  
* Some say Flying-Squirrel heard Crow's children cating, and thir father scolding them for making & noise, a5 the people would hear them and become suspicions, He ran out and seized some of ther food, which he brought to the people, who discovered that it was fat. +1 have lately collected among the Thompson Indians a sory very similar to this one, 3 See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 23 
 

----

712 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
“Do you smell that strange smell? It is other than woman's privates I 
smell” Her friend declared that she could smell nothing, and was in the 
act of handing over some more food when Dirty-Lad seized her hand. The 
woman asked him who he was, and he answered, “I am a man’ She said, “You will be our husband.” The lad saw that the women were young, and 
that the cause of their blindness was a skin or film which had grown over 
their eyes. He took a bone of a black bear, burned it, sharpened his knife, 
and said, “Now I will cure your eyes” He pressed the bone against the 
eyeball, raised the skin, which adhered to the bone, and cut it away with 
his knife. Thus he treated their cyes, and told them to wash with warm water. 
When: the women looked at their husband, and saw that he was ugly, 
ragged, dirty, and lousy, they washed him with water, inside and out, thus 
transforming him into a clean man of good appearance. They made new 
clothes for him, and also a bow and two arrows, and told him, when he 
hunted, to always shoot above the game, and never at it. He hunted much, 
and killed caribou, elk, and deer, so that his house was full of meat; and 
his wives melted much fat. He staid contentedly with his wives for several 
years, ‘and had a son by cach of them. 
One day he was thinking of his friends, and felt sorrowful. His wives 
knew his thoughts, and said, “Our husband is thinking of his friends, and 
feels sorrowful. We will accompany him to see them.” Each of them put 
all the meat and fat into a mitten, and together they journeyed to their 
husband's old home. When they had almost reached the place, the wives 
said to their husband, “You will divide the meat and fat among the people. 
If any of the women smile at you, or laugh, do not smile or laugh yourself” 
When they arrived, Dirty-Lad" emptied out the contents of the mittens, and 
the meat and fat assumed their natural proportions. Then the people all sat in a circle, and Dirty-Lad went around distributing the meat and fat, 
giving a piece at a time to each person. Thus he went round and round the circle until the last of the meat had been given away. After staying a 
few days with the people, Dirty-Lad and his family returned home. 
Again he hunted, and killed caribou, elk, and deer, so that his house 
became filled with meat; and his wives proposed that they should visit their 
husband's friends again, and make presents of the meat. They travelled as 
before, and, upon reaching the people's house, the wives said to their 
husband, “You will distribute the meat. If, when handing any women their 
share of the meat, any one of them presses your hand, you must not smile 
at her” The people sat in a circle, and Dirty-Lad distributed the meat as 
before. As he was handing the very last piece to a woman, she pressed 
his hand, and he smiled at her. Immediately his wives and children assumed 
the form of elks, and ran out. Then all the meat and fat came to life, and

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 713 
ran away in the form of caribou, elk, and deer. Coyote tried to hold on to 
some of the meat as it was being transformed, but was unable to do so; and the animals kicked him so much as they ran out, that he became 
senseless. Dirty-Lad was transformed back to his original self, and lived 
among the people in the ragged, dirty state he had been in before, and as 
ugly and lousy as ever. 
30. STORY OF NTCE'MKA AND THE GIANT. 
Ntce'mka was the only man in the world who was as large and strong 
as the giants! He was a noted hunter and successful fisherman, He was 
so strong that he could carry four buck-deer on his back with the greatest 
case. When he killed black bears, he would shove one into each side of 
his belt, and walk home with them. Like the giants, he dressed in cap, 
robe, leggings, belt, and moccasins, all of black bearskin. His fect were so 
large that he required an entire black bearskin for each moccasin. One day 
in winter he ran short of meat, and decided to go fishing. He made a hole 
in the ice and speared fish, of which he soon had a great number. heaped 
up on the ice 
While thus engaged, he felt the ice shake, and the water moved up 
and down in the hole. c he did not see anything, he continued to 
spear fish; but again the ice trembled, and the water moved up and down. This happened four times. The last time, as he looked around to discover 
the cause, he saw a huge giant approaching. When he saw Ntce'mka, he 
stamped his foot violently, the ice trembled and threw a lot of Ntce'mka's 
fish back into the water. Again the giant stamped his foot, and the same thing occurred.  Nice'mka told him not to do this, but the giant paid no 
heed. When he had stamped his foot the fourth time, the last of the fish 
fell back into the water. 
Now Nice'mka was angry because the stranger had given no heed to 
his commands, and also because he had lost all his fish: therefore he attacked 
the giant, and they fought. The fight lasted a long time,! and the combatants 
wrestled and rolled over each other, covering a great tract of country, and 
creating hillocks and hollows wherever they rolled. Neither could get the 
best of the other; and Ntce'mka retired to the mountains, where he afterwards 
lived with the giants. 
          
p. 80; sso known to the U'mqt and Lillooet, 
  + See Tet, Traditions of the Thompson River Indi = Some say he was a gisot, and nol a real human being or Indian. + Some say the fish he caught were not real fish, but monster, or “watermysteries.” « Some say four days, or longe + Some my they wer atl hing when OLd-One, or some other Transformer, came along and transformed the country over which they had rolled, making of it mountains and valleys. If Nice'mka and the giant bad not fought and rolled over the earth, there would likely have been no mountains or valleys. The country would have been & plain. He transformed Nice'mka into a giant, and banished him 0 the mountain, saying, “Henceforth you shall be a giant and live in the mountains with giants.” 
       
 

----

714 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
40. THe Max aNp THE Four CansmaLs; or, THE Macic Arrows. 
A man lived with his young wife, who was very wise, and gifted with 
magic. She said, “Danger threatens you: therefore 1 will make for you four 
arrows, which you must always carry in your quiver, and never use for 
shooting deer or other animals” He cut wood for her, and she made the 
arrows and tied them together. When the man went hunting, he carried 
these arrows, but never used them, not even when his quiver was empty 
of other arrows, and game was in sight. 
One day he was hunting below Big Bar on the west side of Fraser 
River. The ground was good, but here and there broken by bluffs of rock. 
Looking over one of these, he saw below him a large band of mountain- 
sheep. It was impossible to approach within arrow-shot without being seen. 
He said to himself, “If somebody would only shoot the sheep for me!” Then, again, he thought, “If some one would only drive them for me!” Just then he heard a man's voice behind the sheep, calling “Xwot'o.” as some Indians 
do when driving game. The sheep all looked around. Then a voice sounded 
from below, and another from above, and the sheep all started to run one 
way. A fourth voice then sounded from above, “Run to Gap-in-Stone 
(Saieqsélist '), sit down there and shoot them.” Thinking that the voices were 
those of Indians hunting, and seeing the sheep heading towards that place, 
the man ran there, and arrived just in time to see the first sheep emerge 
from between the rocks. As they came out, one after another he shot them, 
until all his arrows were discharged. Just then four large rams with enormous 
horns came along. He said to himself, “Why does my wife forbid me to 
shoot her arrows? I have been carrying them a long time, now I will use 
them” He untied the four arrows, and shot the rams with them. The dead 
sheep lay close together, and he skinned them and cut them up. He put all the rib-pieces in one pile, the forelegs in another, the head-pieces in 
another; and so on, thus making cight piles. He took a large tripe, and 
filled it with blood to take home. When he had finished, he lighted a fire 
and roasted four pieces of meat. While he was eating the meat, four men appeared who carried spears 
to the handles of which were attached strings of human nails and teeth, 
which made a jingling noise as they walked. He was afraid when he saw 
their fierce appearance, and offered them some of the roasted meat to eat. 
One of the men swallowed the meat at a single gulp, so he gave them 
more. They looked threatening, and he threw the raw legs to them, one 
  
| A place in that country where Indians sit to shoot sheep that ace driven 10 them out of the cafion and bluffs below. The name means “gapin-tone,” or “cutin-two stone.’

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 71s 
after another. They finished these with a few gulps, and thus he gave 
them one pile of meat after another, and at last the skins. When all was 
gone, they attacked him, shaking their spears, and crying “Nem, nem, nem!” 
Then he picked up the tripe, intending to give it to them; and the blood inside made a noise. When the cannibals heard this, they drew back in 
fear. After a little while, when they returned, he shook the tripe at them 
again, and they ran away some distance. The fourth time they returned, he 
threw the tripe up into the air: it fell on the ground and burst with a loud 
report, and the blood came running out. The cannibals were very much 
afraid, and ran off a long ways. Then the man seized his empty quiver, and ran for home as fast as he 
could. The cannibals chased him but, when they came near him, he tore the 
earth up with his fingers, and threw it backwards between his legs. This made 
them run away; but they always returned. Four times he did this; but they 
still continued their pursuit. By this time the man was very tired. While 
he was running along, he heard the sound of chopping, and came upon two 
women who were felling trees with chisels. He asked for their assistance, 
and they transformed him into a baby, saying, “You must cry hard” Then 
they changed one of the chips into a cradle, put him into it, and onc of 
them took him on her back, and resumed her work. Just then the cannibals 
arrived and asked the women if they had seen a deer (meaning the man) 
pass that way. They answered, “No” The cannibals said, “His tracks lead right 
to this spot?” but the women said nothing had passed them. The cannibals 
searched in vain for the man, and at last gave up the pursuit, and disappeared. 
Then the women changed the man back into his natural form, and 
contracted the distance that separated them from his home, so that it became 
quite short. They said, “Go straight over that hill, and you will see your 
camp” He would not believe them, and said, “You must be mistaken. I 
know where my camp is, and it is a long way from here” Finally he went, 
and was much surprised to see his camp just on the other side of the hill. 
When he reached home, his wife asked him what had happened to him, 
and he told her the whole story. She laughed and said, “Now you see the 
result of disobeying me. 1 made those four arrows for the four cannibals 
who torment the country. If you had kept them, you would have killed 
them when they attacked you. By not listening to my advice, you have 
nearly lost your life.”    
41. Tue WoMAN WHO BECAME A GRisLy BEAR! 
One time in the fall of the year a large party of people went into the 
mountains to a place called Pethiichil, near High Bar, to dig cinquefoil-roots.   
+ See Boas, Mythology of the Bella Coola Indians, Vol. I of this series, p. 111; Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 19 of this volume; also Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 72.

----

716 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
When they were ready to return home, one woman, who had four brothers and three sisters, began to menstruate, and asked to be left behind. She 
said, “When I get well, I will dig a few more roots and then come home.” 
When her period was over, she washed herself and went digging roots. 
While thus engaged, the Grisly Bear appeared to her in the form of a fine- 
looking man, and said, ‘I want you for a wife” She assented, and followed 
him. He took her back into the high mountains, and they reached a hole 
in a steep side-hill, which he told her was his home. They entered the den, 
and shortly afterwards there came a heavy storm, and the snow blocked up 
the entrance. The Grisly Bear now told his wife that he would soon go to 
sleep for the winter, and asked her if she was hungry. Then he gave 
her several baskets full of honey, and a large quantity of dried salmon and 
hog-fennel and cinquefoil-roots. He said, “There is enough honey to suck, 
and roots and berries to eat, to last you until spring” Then he lay down 
beside the woman and went to sleep. He had no connection with her, for 
it was not the season of bears. 
The woman thought of her brothers, and said to herself, “They will 
search for me, and surely among them they have enough magic power to 
find me” The Grisly Bear at once knew her thoughts, and growled four 
times, — once when she thought of all her brothers, and once again 
as she thought of each. When she thought of her youngest brother, he did not growl. She took this as an omen that the youngest brother would 
kill the bear. 
The brothers searched for her, but could find no trace of her, owing to 
the fresh fall of snow. They returned home, saying that they would look for her tracks in the spring, when the snow had thawed. 
Meanwhile the woman spent a dreary and lonely time in the bear's den. In the spring the brothers found their sister's tracks, followed them, and 
discovered the den. The snow which had blocked up the entrance all winter 
had now become quite thin: so they made a little hole through it, letting in 
the sunlight. The grisly bear awoke, but was still half asleep. The eldest 
brother aimed his arrow through the hole to shoot it, but the woman pushed 
him aside. She did the same with the next two brothers. When the youngest 
pointed his arrow through the hole, she directed it toward the place where 
the bear was sitting, and then drew aside to let him shoot. The arrow went 
right through the grisly bear, killing it. The woman ran out, while the 
brothers entered, and pulled out the carcass of the bear. Their sister said 
to them, “Save the skin for me, claws and all” The brothers gave her the 
skin, and they went home. 
Then the woman built a brush lodge, and lived apart, some little distance 
away from the people. No one visited her except her youngest sister, who 
was a small girl. One day she sent her sister to her mother to ask for four

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 77 
arrowheads." When she got these, she put them into her mouth, and they 
became like the teeth of a bear. One day, when she was engaged in dressing 
skins just outside her lodge, she put on her bear-skin, went up to the frame 
on which a skin was laced, and bit the frame to try her teeth. She found 
that they were loose. Therefore she took off the skin and hid it in the lodge. 
Meanwhile the dogs of the village had noticed her. They took her for a 
bear, and barked very much. Some people asked her why the dogs were 
barking at her; and she answered, “They were barking at the frame.” She 
tested her teeth and claws several times; and on the fourth trial she found 
them firm enough to suit her. Then she told her youngest sister to ask her 
mother for some raw salmon. When she got this, she ate it immediately, 
and the little sister saw her large teeth. The girl went back and said to 
her mother, “My eldest sister has new teeth, and they are very large, like 
those of the grisly bear:® but her mother would not believe her. 
One day, shortly after this had happened, the four brothers were out hunting. Then the woman put on her grisly-bear skin, and ran about and killed all the people, including her mother and two of her sisters. She took her youngest sister with her into the mountains, where she built a lodge. Here she dug roots, and made the little sister do very hard work. She also abused her, and used her hair for wiping herself after defecating. The youngest sister was much grieved, and always cried when digging roots alone. The brothers had been out on a long hunt. When they returned, they found all the people killed, and heard their little sister crying, “Oh, if my brothers were here! Oh, if they could only find me!” They were surprised to find their little sister on the mountains. She related to them how their eldest sister had become a grisly bear and had killed the people, and also the manner in which she treated her. The brothers asked her how the Grisly Bear was accustomed to sit, and she told them, “She sits with her hands and feet spread out towards the fire” Then they said, “Make four little holes on the side of the lodge towards which she faces. . We want to watch her.” They gave her a foolhen, and asked her to give it to her elder sister. Soon the Grisly Bear came home. She did not notice the holes that the girl had made. When she saw the grouse, she said, “How did you get that grouse today? Heretofore you never killed grouse when you were digging roots. You must have met your brothers, and got it from them.” The girl denied having met her brothers, and asserted that she had killed the bird with a stick. Then the Grisly Bear believed her, and took the grouse to the fire to roast it. After the Bear had eaten the grouse, and as she was sitting before the fire with her hands and feet stretched apart, the brothers aimed their arrows through the four holes in the walls of the hut, 
  
+ Some say white arrow-stones  otbers say pieces of jade. Some say copper arrow-heads; others, bone awls,

----

718 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
shot at the same time, and the four arrows pierced the hands and feet of the bear! Then they killed her, and, cutting the carcass into small pieces, 
they threw it to the four quarters. They kept the heart? however, which 
they placed in a birch-bark bucket and hid it. 
After burning the lodge, they went to another place not very far away, 
where they built a new hut. As all the women of their tribe had been 
Killed, they married their little sister. She gave birth to a child, who grew 
up very rapidly. Meanwhile the Grisly Bear had with difficulty, and after a 
long time, gathered all her parts together, and become well again. One day, 
while the brothers were away hunting, she came to the lodge, and killed 
and ate her sister® Then she took the child on her lap, nursed it, and sang 
a cradlesong. The brothers, on their way home, heard the echo of her 
voicé, and said, “That is not our little sister's voice: it is that of the Grisly 
Bear” One of them took the bucket with the heart, and another took two 
flat stones. When they entered the lodge, the Grisly Bear was still nursing 
the child, and pretended to be their wife. The brothers appeared not to 
notice that anything was wrong. They said they were thirsty, and asked 
her to fetch some water. She took a bucket, and soon came back with some 
muddy water. They threw the water out, saying it was not fit to drink, 
and told her to bring clear water. Meanwhile they put the two flat stones 
into the fire to heat them. Each time she returned with water, the brothers declared it was not fit to drink, and sent her for clear water. When she 
had gone the fourth time, the stones were red hot. They pulled them out 
of the fire, and placed the Bear's heart between them. Now the Grisly knew 
what had happened, and ran back to kill her brothers, and to save her heart, for her life was in it. However, the heart was burned up before she 
reached the lodge, and she fell down dead; for, although her body was not 
hurt, her life had been destroyed. After this, the brothers left that part of 
the country and went to a distant place, where they took wives among 
strange people. Then they returned and settled at High Bar, where they 
lived, and had many children. 
4a. Story oF Teotcu’ca; ok, Tie Hunter who pecaME A WoLF. 
There was a famine in the land, and a certain family of people were 
moving from place to place, trying to find game. Among them was a man 
called Little-Leader (Tcoteu'lcd¥), who was noted as an indifferent hunter: 
and, being in a very weak and starving condition, he could not keep up 
with the other people when they moved camp. 
Some say two arrows entered her breast, and two her abdomen. 1 It seems the Grisly Bear's lfe was in her heart. 2 Some sdd, she dressed in the dead gir’ clothes, which were fur too small for ber. 4 A diminutive form of the word, applied to the leader of a pack of wolves.  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 719 
One day when the people were travelling, and he was slowly following 
them, he noticed the tracks of a deer which was being followed by a large 
wolf! Both had just crossed his path: so, putting down his burden, he followed 
them until he came to the place where the deer had been caught and eaten by the wolf, who had finished all except the front legs, on which a little 
meat remained. Little-Leader took these, put them in his pack, and, when 
he reached camp, he roasted them after the people had all gone to sleep. 
On the following day he was travelling behind the people, as usual, and 
again he noticed the tracks of a deer and a wolf which had just crossed his 
path. He followed them, and came to- where the wolf had eaten the deer. 
There he found a number of bones with more or less meat on them, put them in his pack, and ate the meat when he reached camp. On the third 
day the same thing happened, and he found more meat on the bones than before. On the fourth day, tracks crossed his path as before, and, following 
them, he came to where a large wolf was sitting beside the carcass of a deer that he had just killed. 
The Wolf said, “Come here! What are you doing?” And the man 
answered, “I have followed your tracks, thinking that I might gat some of 
the meat you might leave, as I am a poor hunter, and I am weak and 
starving” The Wolf said, “It is well. You have been poor and hungry a 
long time. Now I will help you’ He took two long feathers from the centre of the tail of a chicken-hawk and a small bag of red paint, and gave 
them to the man, saying, “When you hunt, tie up your hair behind your 
head and stick these feathers in the knot. Take this paint, and draw with 
it one stripe on each side of your face, from the eyebrow down over the 
eye to the jaw.* This deer that 1 have killed is of no use to me, for its 
entrails are torn! Take the carcass home with you and feed your people.” 
The man carried the deer home, and when he gained strength, he 
began to hunt, and was so successful that he soon filled all the lodges with 
meat, and the people had plenty to eat. He was very careful to follow 
closely all the instructions the Wolf had given him. He never ate any meat 
himself, but only the marrow of old deerbones, which he roasted. This 
made him fleet of foot. Although the people pressed him to marry, he 
always refused, saying. “If 1 take a wife, I shall lose all my power, and I 
shall not be able to run fast.” . 
The people did not know that the Wolf had helped him and had 
    
This wolf was leader. The leaders of a pack are called test's or teod, and niko'a (+frst” or “leader”). They are the largest and flectest wolves of the pack, and run and kill the deer, while the other wolves only follow to cat. = Some say he was told to wear the feathers only when he hunted, and to paint his face only when he Killed a deer, * The Indians say that if a wolf happens to catch a deer, and tears its entrails when killing i, it will not eat the carcass, but leaves it.

----

720 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
become his guardian, and they wondered how such a poor hunter had 
suddenly become far superior to all the other people. Coyote said, “He has 
become a shaman, and has obtained some great guardian spirit.” 
One day, when the man was sweat bathing alone, Coyote noticed that 
he had left his clothes and his quiver lying near his bed; and he said to 
himself, “I will examine them, and see if I can find out what his guardian 
spirit is” He searched the man’s bed, and underneath his pillow, but could 
find no trace of any medicine-bag. The people told Coyote to desist, saying 
that he had no right to search another man's bed; but he paid no attention, 
and looked through Little-Leader’s clothes. Now, the Wolf had told the 
man to hide the paint and feathers at the bottom of his quiver, and never to 
let any one see or touch them. Coyote, having looked in vain everywhere else, took Little-Leader's quiver and emptied out the arrows. At the bottom 
he found the paint and feathers, and said to the people, “Look here! These are his guardians. He paints his face, and ties these feathers to his hair, 
when he hunts, and thus he is successful. 1 will do likewise and go hunting.” 
The man in the sweathouse knew at once what had happened, and 
began to howl like a wolf. The wolves also knew, and came around the 
camp, howling. The man left the sweat-house, assumed the form of a wolf, 
and ran off and joined the wolves, with whom he disappeared, howling loudly. 
Then all the fat and meat, and even the hones and skins, in camp, came 
to life, assumed the forms of deer, ran away, and also disappeared, with the 
wolves baying behind them. Thus the people were left starving as before, 
and could not find game, for the wolves drove it all away. The man never 
returned; and it is said that thereafter he lived with the wolves, and became 
as one of them. 
43. STORY OF THE MAN WHO MARRIED THE GRisLY Bear 
(Fraser River and North Thompson Divisions) 
One spring a man belonging to Big Bar went out hunting, and was 
attacked by a grisly bear, which tore off one of his arms. He managed to 
reach home, however, and by fall the wound had healed. Then he said, ‘I 
will go and seek the grisly bear.” 
Before he had gone very far, he came to where a grisly bear had been 
eating salmon on the banks of a stream. Following the tracks, he arrived 
at a thicket of service:berry bushes, where the bear bad stopped to feed. 
He followed the tracks to a patch of soap-berries, where the bear had also been feeding, and farther on to a place where the bear had been digging 
  
+ See Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, p. 23 of this volume.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 721 
hog-fennel roots and also cinquefoil roots! and at last came in sight of a 
house from which smoke issued. He entered, and saw a very nice-looking woman, who invited him to 
sit down. The only other occupant of the house was the woman's father, 
who was a very old man, and lay huddled up in a corner. The woman, 
who was making bark mats, arose and gave the man some salmon. While 
he was cating, she laughed at him because he had only one arm, and joked 
a great deal about it. When he had finished eating, she said to him, ‘I 
wish you to be my husband. Will you stay with me? He consented, and 
she made a thick bed of mats, on which they lay down together. Then she 
pulled out a bundle from the head of the bed, opened it, and showed the 
man his arm. She put it in place, and at once it became the same as 
before, and he was glad. Soon the man wished to have connection with 
her; but she pushed him away, saying, “I am not like women of your kind. 
You cannot have intercourse with me. It is not my season.” 
On the following day she sent him to hunt black bear, and said, “If you 
see bear's tracks going through fallen logs of a gray color, do not follow 
them; but if they pass through fallen timber of a black color, then follow 
them, and you will be sure to find a black bear”? Before long the hunter saw tracks leading through black timber, followed them, and came to a black 
bear's house. He killed the bear, which was very fat, and carried the meat 
home. Four times he went hunting, and, following his wifes directions, he 
killed a fat black bear each time. Then his wife said, “We have so much meat that we cannot possibly 
eat it. Let us give a feast to the people” She told her father to go and 
invite them. He put on a grislybear skin, and looked just like a bear. 
Soon he returned with many people, who looked just like grisly bears. 
Then the woman said to her husband, “Be not afraid when you sce my 
people. They are my brothers and sisters. Sit close to me. If you run 
away, they will kill you’* 
When the bears smelt the man, they made a great noise, pawed the 
earth, and tore the bark of the trees. Now the woman said to them, “Don’t 
roar so loudly and act so terribly. You make your brother-in-law afraid.” 
At last the bears finished their feast, and all dispersed 
The man staid with the woman all winter. When spring came, she 
gave him a grisly-bear's penis, and, taking him to the side of a small bank 
or knoll, they had connection after the manner of bears. In due time the 
woman bore two children: and when they were strong, she said to her 
  
© “These are favorite foods of grisly bears. # The Indians say that grisly bears prefer to walk through fallen timber which has been burnt and become gray or bleached by age; while black bears prefer to travel hrought fallen timber more recently burt, which is black. * The Indians believe that to ran away from a grisly bear means almost certain death.

----

722 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
husband, “We will go to where the people live. Perhaps you would like to 
sec your friends” When. they arrived near the mouth of Big Bar Creek, 
where there is a large patch of service-berries,! the man visited his friends 
while his wife and children were picking berries. His relatives had all cut 
their hair, for they thought he was dead. They wondered at seeing him, 
and were astonished to find that his arm had grown on again. 
While he was talking to them, some one came with the news that a 
grisly bear and two cubs were feeding in the berry-patch. The people said, 
“We will go and kill them” The man accompanied them; and when they 
came close to the bears, he said to them, *Sit down and watch me. 1 will 
go and kill them alone” When he reached them, the cubs ran out and 
played with him, and the old bear came up and embraced him. The people thought their behavior very strange, and, thinking that there was some 
mystery about it, they returned home. The man went away with his wife 
and children. The wife said to him, “You did not see enough of your friends. Go 
and live with them for a while; but be very careful to avoid pubescent girls, 
menstruating women, and women who have recently given birth." * 
Then he returned to the people, and lived with them. They moved 
camp to gather soap-berries; and before they had been there long, some one 
came with the tidings that a grisly bear and cubs were feeding in the soap- 
berry patch. The people went to kill them, and the man accompanied them. 
When they came in sight of the bears, he told the hunters to sit down, 
saying, “Watch me! I will go alone and kill the bears’ When he drew 
near, the bears ran to meet him, and embraced and played with him. He 
went away with them, but returned again to the people. 
Soon the people moved to dig hog-fennel roots, and the same thing 
happened. Then they moved to dig cinquefoil-roots, and the same bears 
were discovered feeding there. The man went out as before to meet them; 
but the cubs attacked him. Then the old bear attacked him, and they ate 
him up, for he had been defiled by a pubescent girl. The people could not 
kill the bears, but returned home, saying, “These are his wife and children.” 
44. THE MAN WHO MARRIED THE SA'TUEN. 
A lad was badly treated by the people, who always scolded him, gave 
him the worst food to eat, and old things to wear. He felt much grieved 
because of his treatment, and left his village. He wandered south along 
Fraser River, remained a little while in each village that he passed, and   
© This place is ssid 10 be a litle above Phil Grinders ranch. # For this reason the Indians are very particular, when hunting, to avoid those persons in every way, because otherwise they fear they may invite auacks by grisly bears.  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 723 
thus reached the Thompson River, where he remained some time. Then he 
continued his journey, passed beyond Columbia River, and eventually arrived 
in the country of the Sa'tuen! There he came to many houses on a large 
grassy plain. He entered the first house, which was occupied by a very old 
man and his grand-daughter? They asked him where he had come from, 
and what he was doing there. He answered, “I am a Shuswap. My country 
is far away to the north. | have wandered south to sce the world” The 
old man said, “I know your country. We rest there every year going north.” 
The young woman asked him to be her husband: so he staid with her 
all winter. 
One day in the early spring she said to him, “In ten days all the 
people will make ready for their journey north. You will go with us and 
see your own country” The lad was glad to hear this. One morning the 
chiefs blew bone “whistles! and all the people put on their Crane dresses, 
and blew their whistles in imitation of the cries of Cranes. They flapped 
their wings, and then ascended and descended in the air. Thus they acted 
for four days, morning and evening. The woman said to her husband, “The 
people are now practising and making ready for the journey north” She 
had done the same as the other people. Then the man said to himself, 
“This numerous people, whose houses cover the plain, are, after all, the Cranes that I used to see pass my home every spring. 1 shall be deserted. 
They will all soon leave here, my wife among the rest” His wife knew 
his thoughts, and said, “We shall not leave you. We shall take you along." 
On the following morning all the birds came, and cach plucked a feather 
out of its body and out of one wing, and gave it to him. His wife fastened them to his body, and he was now able to fly. She also gave him a whistle 
made from the wing-bone of the Crane. For two days they trained themselves, 
fying up and down above the houses, and on the next morning they flew 
away on their northern journey. The man, his ‘wife, and father-in-law 
followed a little behind the others. This is the reason why three birds are 
always seen flying behind the others. 
When they reached the Shuswap country, the Cranes asked the young 
man where his home was. He named a place near Horse Lake, where his 
people were living at that time. The Crane people alighted and camped 
near there that night. This is the reason why the cranes always rest there 
on the passage north or south. 
His wife said, “Go to your friends’ camp and visit them, but return at 
daybreak” He spent the night there, told all his adventures, and heard all 
the news that they had to tell. At daylight he left, saying, ‘I am now going 
  
© A variety of crane or heron. © Some say his daughter, + The same kind of whistles 1s are wed by Indian young men and women.

----

724 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
to join my wife” The people followed him, and saw him fly away with the 
Cranes, who were going far north to their breeding-grounds. 
In the fall of the year, on their way back, they camped again near the 
people; and the man visited his friends, taking with him his wife and children. On the following morning they all flew away south, to the land of the 
Cranes. Thus the man visited his friends for many years on his passages 
north and south, until his relatives had all died, when he came no more. 
He staid in the land of the Cranes, and became as one of them. He had 
many children. 
45. Tue Max AND THE Dwares. 
Once a young man who was travelling about hunting could not find his 
way back. When he realized that he was lost, he wept. As he went along 
weeping, he came to a place where some dwarfs lived, and saw two of their 
women. They were very short, about two spans high, and had their hair 
done up in the manner of young girls. They asked him why he wept, and 
he answered, “Because 1 am lost, and will no more see home or friends.” 
They laughed, and said, “Your house is not far. We will direct you to it. 
Go straight over to yonder knoll, and from it you will sce your house. 
You must not tell any one that you saw us or that we helped you, (cls evil will befall you)” The man went to the knoll, as directed, saw his 
house, and went home. The dwarfs had contracted the distance, so that it was only a short walk; but in reality the man had been a long distance 
from home. For a long time he told no one; but one day, describing his 
adventures at the time. when he was lost, he said, ‘I never should have 
reached home had it not been for two dwarf women who showed me the way. Shortly after saying this, he died. 
46. THE WOMAN AND HER PARAMOUR. 
A family was short of food, and journeyed toward a place where game 
and fish were plentiful. The husband shot small game as they travelled 
along, while his wife carried the provisions and most of the household effects 
in a large birch-bark basket.* 
One morning the wife said to her husband, “You take the children and 
travel ahead. 1 cannot go fast, as my leg is sore. 1 will follow slowly.” 
When the others were out of sight, a man appeared to the woman and 
tried to persuade her to desert her husband and live with him. He was the   
+ Some add this part, 5 Called smifmess, — a large variety of bischbark basket wed by the Shuswap for carrying purposes, especially when moving camp or going long distances.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 725 
woman's paramour. The woman refused to go with him, saying she would 
not leave her children. “But,” she added, “you can come with me. I will 
carry you in the basket” So she hid him in the bottom of the basket. 
That night when they camped, she took provisions out of the basket and 
fed her family. Her husband, as yet, suspected nothing. 
On the following morning the woman complained of her knee being 
lame, and staid behind as before. As soon as her husband and children 
were out of sight, the man came out of the basket and had connection with 
her. At night when they camped, she gave the last of the food out of the 
basket to her family. In the morning she complained of being lame and 
exhausted, therefore staid behind as usual. 
Then the husband grew suspicious, and said to himself, “Her basket is 
heavy, and yet there is no food in it” That day he camped early, left the 
children, and went back, keeping himself concealed in the timber. From 
there he watched his wife, and saw the man come out of the basket and 
have connection with her. Then the husband returned to his children and 
fed them with small game that he had shot. 
That night he said to his wife, “Your basket is still very heavy. Take 
some food out of it and give us to eat” She answered, “All the provisions 
are finished. 1 am now carrying our household effects only.” 
On the following morning the woman again pretended to be lame, and 
staid behind. It was now the fourth night. When his wife reached camp, 
her husband said to her, “What is in your basket, that it is so heavy? 
And she answered, ‘Nothing much. Did I not tell you before?” The 
husband said, “There must be some food in it,” and commenced to sharpen 
his knife. Going up to the basket, he shook it, and said, “It is indeed very 
heavy. 1 will find out what it contains.” Then he stuck his knife through 
it, and the man jumped out. The husband stabbed him to death. Turning 
to his wife, he said, “That man whom I have just killed is your husband. 
You had better accompany him:” so, taking hold of his wife, he stabbed her 
to death also. 
  47. Tus Wovax axp THE WaTR-MysTeRY. 
[This story is the same as the one told in Teit, “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” Dp. 83, 84, with the following exceptions. The water-mystery was half man, half fish, according to some; a kind of snake, according to others; and many say it was a kind of frog. — The woman always went to dig roots by the lake shore, but pretended 10 be too sick to get many. Therefore her basket was almost empty every night. One day the husband said, “I will take your place digging roots today, and will also get some medicine to make you well” — When the husband called Nukano’xa, the lake shook violently, and the water-mystery came to the surface. — When on top of him, the husband cut off his privates, and the “mystery” ran to the lake, streaming with blood. — The husband put the privates of the monster in the bottom of the basket, underneath the roots, and said to his wife. “Vou will find the medicine I gathered in the bottom of the basket.”

----

726 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
She looked, and was startled 10 find the privates of the water-mystery. Then her husband said, “That is your husband,” and stabbed her to death.] 
48. THE GAMBLER'S SON AND THE STAR-MAN.! 
A wealthy man gambled and raced horses with the chief of a neighboring 
tribe until he lost his dogs, horses, and everything he had. His wife and 
son were much grieved because they had come to be so poor. The lad, in 
a fit of shame and discontent, left home and wandered over the country. 
One day, as he was crossing a plain, he saw a star fall down ahead of 
him, and soon afterwards he saw a man walking towards him ® from the spot. 
When the man met him, he said, I know you are downcast, and I pity you. 
I have come to advise and help you. If you go to the far side of yonder 
hill, you will sce a horse that will speak to you’ The lad obeyed, and 
found the horse, which looked very thin and miserable. Now, this horse 
was none other than the Star-Man, who had disappeared, and transformed 
himself into a horse, which told the lad to mount, and said, “I will take you 
to the land of the chief who won your father's wealth, and there you will 
race me against his horses, and win back all your father's property.” 
The lad did as requested, and was carried to the hostile chief, whom 
he challenged to a race. The lad staked his clothes, horse, and all he had, 
against one of the chief's horses. The latter laughed at the idea of such a 
poor-looking animal winning a race: so he ran his worst horse against him. 
The lad won the race, and now put up the horse he had won against 
dnother of the chiefs horses. The chief selected a better horse this time; 
but the lad won again. Then he staked the two horses, and continued 
enlarging his bet and winning races until he had won more than the value 
of what his father had lost. In the last race the chief was much netted, 
and ran his very best horse. The lad’s horse gave him a quirt and said 
to him, “If the chief's horse gets ahead of me, then whip me” When he 
whipped him, his steed ran like the wind, passed the other horse, reached 
the goal, and then met the chief's racehorse, and ran around him. The 
lad brought his horse in dancing. The chief then wanted to buy the horse, 
but the lad declined to sell it. He offered all his wealth for it; but the lad 
refused his offer. Then the lad returned with all the horses, dogs, and 
property he had won. When near home, his friend said, “Now 1 will leave 
you? and resumed the shape of a man. He bade the lad good-by, and 
ascended to the sky as if blown upward. When he got some distance away, 
the lad could only see a star, which finally reached the sky, and disappeared 
  
11 could not get the name of this lad. The Indians say they have forgotten it. He is the same person who afterwards had the adventures with Ked.Cap. Some think he was Alami'e; and others say his name was “ttle Man,” but are not sure. + Some think the star was his guardian.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 727 
among the others. The lad reached home, and his parents were very glad to have their wealth restored to them. 
49. Tue GamBLER's Son AND Rep-Car.' 
Some time after the gamblers son had won back his father's wealth, a stranger * wearing a red cap visited him, and proposed that they should play 
lchal and other games. They gambled until Red-Cap had won everything. 
At last they staked themselves. This time the lad won, and claimed Red- 
Cap as his slave. Almost immediately afterwards the stranger and all he 
had won vanished as if the ground had swallowed them up.’ The lad was 
much vexed, and wandered about in the mountains. 
At last he met a young woman, and asked her if she knew where Red- 
Cap lived. She did not know, and advised him to go where a young man 
lived. On reaching his place of abode, he asked the young man, but in 
turn was directed to go to an old woman, who answered that she did not 
know either, and sent him to an old man. This old man, who lived at 
the edge of a great lake, was Bald-Headed Eagle. In answer to the 
lad’s query, he said, “Yes, I know where Red-Cap lives. My grandson, it 
is very far away and very hard to reach; but I will help you” He gave 
the boy four deer-hoofs filled with food, directed him to feed him whenever 
he seemed to become weak, and invited him to sit on his shoulders. Then 
he flew with the lad far out to the middle of the great lake. The lad fed 
the Eagle the contents of one hoof, and the bird ascended until he was as 
high as the mountaintops. He began to weaken again, and fell back. The 
lad gave him the contents of another hoof, and he rose to the level of the 
lower clouds. Again the lad fed him, and he rose up to the highest clouds. 
The fourth time he fed him, the Eagle rose almost to the sky; and from 
here they were able to sce the shores of the great lake. On the cast rose a high cliff; and beyond, in a level country, they 
could see Red-Cap's house. Now Bald-Headed Eagle flew with the boy to 
a place near Red-Cap's house, where he alighted, and advised the lad, saying, 
“Go and hide near the creck where the chief's daughters bathe every evening. 
The garter of the clder one is green; that of the younger one is red. Steal 
the green one, and return it to her if she will promise to help you. Then 
you will be successful. 1 will wait here for you six days, in case you should 
need my aid. If you do not appear within that time, I shall know that you 
are safe, and shall return home.”   
© See Farrand, Traditions of the Chileotin Indians, p. 26 of this volume. This story is also related to the tale of Asta (Astiwa Trimshian (see F. Boss, Segen, etc. p. 255). © This was Red-Cap, who, some say, was a chief of white people. Some Indians claim that he was the redheaded woodpecker, but most of then agree that he was the thunder. + Some say they vanished, or became invisible; others say everything sank into the ground as raindrops, etc.    

----

728 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Then the lad dug a hole, and hid Bald-Headed Eagle in it. He erected 
a shade of brush over his head to protect him from the sun, for it was very hot in that country. In the evening the lad hid near the creck, and saw 
Red-Cap's daughters come down to bathe. When they were in the water, 
he rushed out and seized the garters of both. The girls squatted in the water, and the elder prayed him to give back their garters, promising that 
he should marry her younger sister. He returned the red garter to the 
younger one, but would not give back the other until the elder one promised 
to be his wife and to help him. Atlast she consented. Then he withdrew 
and let them dress. The girls informed him that their father’s name was 
Red-Cap, that he was chief of that country, and that he was a cannibal. 
Many young men had come there to marry the sisters; but their father 
always put them through a number of tests, in which they had all failed, 
and thus had met their deaths. She also told him what the tests were, and 
asked him not to be afraid, for, if he thought constantly of her when in 
trouble, he would escape all dangers. 
Then the lad entered Red-Cap’s house and asked for the hand of his 
daughter. Red-Cap said that he might have his daughter if he proved 
himself worthy, and proficient in magic. The lad expressed his willingness 
to undergo anything for the sake of the girl: so Red-Cap ushered him into 
a den of bears. and immediately the stone door shut behind him. Whenever 
he thought of the girl, the bears were tame, and remained quiet; but, as 
soon as his thoughts wandered to something else, they growled and made 
ready to attack him. He remained there four days, and the girl opened the 
door and fed him each night. At the end of the fourth day, Red-Cap opened 
the door, expecting to find that he had been devoured, and was surprised to see him as well as ever. 
Then he put him into a cave full of excrement, and the stone entrance 
closed behind him. Here he remained four days; but he constantly thought 
of the girl, and the excrement neither harmed him, nor did he suffocate or 
notice any smell. 
Next he was thrown into a cave full of needles, where there was no 
place to lie, sit, or stand without being pricked. For four days he remained 
there; but, by constantly thinking of the girl, the needles gave him no pain, 
nor drew any blood. 
Then Red-Cap gave him the fourth and severest test. He placed him 
in a cave of cold and ice, expecting that he would freeze to deaths but, by 
thinking of the girl, the temperature around him became warm, and he spent 
the four days in comfort. When Red-Cap found him still unharmed, he 
said, “You may have my daughter. You have proved yourself worthy, and 
t in magic power.” 
    
+ Some say hogs.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 729 
After this he lived with his wife, but liked neither the country nor his father-in-law. He told his wife that he wished to return to his own country, 
saying, “Bald-Headed Eagle brought me here; but now he has left, and 
I do not know how to go, for my country is so far away. His wife said, 
“We will take my father's horses. They can go like the wind, walk on 
ropes and hairs without falling off and on water without sinking. So they 
put food for the journey into four hoofs, and, rolling up four blankets, they 
went at night and took Red-Cap's two magic horses, one of which was all 
white and the other all black, and started on their journey. 
On the following morning Red-Cap missed them, and gave chase mounted 
on what scemed like the lightning. When he had nearly overtaken them, 
they unrolled the red blanket and threw it behind them, thus creating a large 
tract of mud, knee-deep and very sticky. Red-Cap had much difficulty getting 
through this. At last, however, he drew near to them again, and they 
unrolled the green’ blanket, and threw it behind them, creating a dense 
thicket of scrub-pine. After a while Red-Cap surmounted this obstacle also, 
and again gained on them fast. Then they unrolled the white blanket and 
threw it behind them, creating a wide tract of wet alkali-ground. very slippery.? 
As Red-Cap came close to them the fourth time, they unrolled the black * 
blanket and threw it behind them, creating a dense patch of hawthorn-bushes. 
Red-Cap had much trouble getting through, as the thorns tore his clothes and the skin of his horse, thus making it afraid and nervous. This gave 
the fugitives time to reach a lake, where the woman pulled a hair out of her head and, throwing it down, it formed a bridge on which the horses 
walked across. They had just gotten over when Red-Cap appeared on the opposite shore and followed them across the bridge. Now they told the 
hair to break when Red-Cap reached the middle, which it did, and thus he 
and his horse were thrown into the lake and were drowned. The lad 
reached his own. country with his wife and horses, which made him very 
wealthy, for they ran much faster than any other horses, and thus he won 
all the races. 
50. STORY OF ALAMERS 
Alame&r was the son of a chief who had many wives. Among them 
were two slave-women, who were not treated as the equals of the other 
wives, and lived in a house by themselves, close to that of their husband. 
    
1 Some say yellow. + Some say ice. * Some say blue. + Some say the man did thi. + The narrator of this story, a man of sixty or more, said that although he had heard it told when he was a mere boy (snd the story is said to have been current even before his time), he believed the sory was probably learned by the old people from some of the first Hudson Bay Company's halfbreeds, who lived in the country. ‘The meaning of Alamé’ is unknown. The story belongs clearly to the cycle of European folk-ales.

----

730 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Orie day Alamer entered their house and wished to have connection with 
them; but they objected to his proposals; and one woman, seizing his robe, 
ran off with it and showed it to the chief, telling him of his son's actions. 
The chief was very angry, and said, “I will kill him” He locked up the women, and sent some of his men to capture his son, telling them to dig a 
grave, take the lad to it, then tomahawk him, and bring his heart to him 
to eat, and also as proof that they had fulfilled his commands. Now, Alam@r had a dog which never left his side. When the men brought him 
to the grave, they took pity on him, and said, “We will allow you to escape, 
and kill your dog in your stead and bury him. The chief will never know 
anything about it” So they did this, cut out the dog's heart, and took it 
to the chief, who ate it. 
The lad travelled far away, and his clothes grew torn and ragged. One 
day, feeling hungry and tired, he lay down at the foot of a tree and cried 
himself to sleep. He was awakened by a young man of comely appearance, 
who said to him, “I sce you are in distress. I will help you, and be your 
adviser and protector. 1 will be a helper to you. When you call on me, 
saying, ‘Friend, I will at once appear to you and give you aid. Don't 
forget me” Saying this, he vanished 
Alamé’r travelled on, and before long reached a place where many 
people lived, who treated him hospitably. He staid with them some time, 
and learned that their chief was afraid of a cannibal who lived not far away. 
They related how the chief had been compelled to- give his four daughters, 
one after another, to the cannibal, who wanted to marry them, and who 
ended by eating them. Three had thus been disposed of, and the cannibal 
had asked for the fourth and last one, who was to be given to him on the morrow; for the chief was afraid to refuse the cannibal’s request. Even now 
the girl's mother was crying because of her daughter's approaching fate. 
When Alamé’r heard the mother's cries, and thought of the horrible fate 
that awaited the girl, he became sad and full of pity. He called up his 
helper, who advised him how to act, and gave him a long double-edged 
knife and two pictures painted on bark. Early the following morning he 
saw the chief start on horseback with his daughter, who rode a very large 
horse intended as a present to the cannibal Alame stepped aside, and 
threw his pictures on the ground. At once the one became a white horse; 
and the other, a white dog. He mounted the horse and rode’to the 
cannibal’s house, which was situated on an open plain. There he waited until 
he saw the chief coming. As soon as the chief and his daughter appeared, 
the cannibal rode out on a black horse accompanied by a black dog to meet 
the chief and take the girl. Alamér approached them when they met, and 
noticed that the girl was crying. The chief said to the cannibal, ‘I now 
give you my last daughter and the horse she rides”

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 731 
Then Alamer interposed, saying, “No! that girl shall not be given fo 
the camnibal” The latter became angry, and said, “Who are you that talks thus? 1 will cat you!” And immediately he attacked him. The horses and 
dogs also began to fight. The white horse killed the black horse; and the 
white dog, the black one; and then they helped Alame'r to kill the cannibal. 
Alam@'r cut off his head and threw it down before the chief, saying, “Be 
no more afraid of this man.” 
The chief and his daughter were glad; and the former offered to give 
his daughter in marriage to Alamé'r; but he refused, saying, “If I become 
acquainted with women, I shall lose my powers. I wish to travel over many 
lands, and become wise.” 
He left that country and travelled about until his clothes were all 
ragged, and his moccasins worn out. At last he reached another people, 
and offered his services to their chief. He said, *I need food and clothes, 
and time to recover from the effects of my journey” Now, the chief of this 
tribe was also in trouble; for a red-haired chief of great mystery had come 
there? some time previously, and had stolen his two nieces, taking them 
away to a distant country. The chief offered to give them in marriage to 
any man who would bring them back; and Alamer said to himself, “I will 
go and get them. 
After a short rest, he started on his journey, and travelled many moons 
around the edge of a great lake. At last he reached the country of the 
red-haired chief, whose: people were numerous, and dressed themselves in 
clothes made of sheep's wool, like those of white people. They were a very 
mysterious and powerful race, and their chief was very fierce and warlike. 
Here Alame’r staid, and received food and some clothes for what work he 
did. He managed to talk to the two women without creating suspicion, and 
asked them if they wished to return to their own country. They were pining to sce their country and friends again: but it was impossible for them to 
get back, as the chief who had stolen them had taken them across the great 
lake in a large canoe, and the voyage had taken many days. 
Alamé'r told them he would take them back home. He called up his 
helper, who advised him how to act, and furnished a large canoe for him, 
which moved swiftly without paddles. When the girls went to wash in the 
creck at evening, as was their habit, Alame’r was near, and they fled with 
him to the canoe. 
When they had been out several days, they reached a small island 
which was situated in the centre of the lake, and here they tied up their 
canoe to refresh themselves. At this place they found another large canoe, 
which was travelling to the same country where they were going. On board 
  
+ Some say he was the thunder. = Some say he came on the warpath, or made 8 raid.

----

732 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 
were two chiefs and many people, who were endowed with much magic. 
They said to the lad, “We will feast you and play games with you te-night.” 
The women were suspicious, and said to Alame’, “We fear these people. 
Take these presents and conceal them on your person. They will prove 
you to be our deliverer.” One woman gave him a finger-ring with her name 
stamped on it; and the other, a silk handkerchief with her name embroidered 
in one corner. That night, while they were playing games, these people, 
through their magic, cast a deep sleep on AlameT. Then they broke his 
canoe and set it adrift, took the women, and left. 
The chiefs learned the history of the women, and said, ‘We will take 
them to their uncle, claim them as our wives, and obtain a rich reward.” 
This they did; but the girls said that these men were not their deliverers. 
Therefore the chief did not give his nieces to them, and told the men, that, 
if no other person came there within one year to claim them as their 
deliverer, he would give the girls to be their wives, and with them much 
property besides. 
When Alam awoke, he found himself deserted and his canoe gone. 
He lived on beaver-meat all winter, until at last he had killed all the beavers 
on the island. Then spring came, and many geese took up their abode 
there; and he lived on their eggs, and as summer advanced he lived on the goslings. When fall came, the geese all left, and, having nothing to 
cat, he began to starve. Owing to the spell that the strange people had 
thrown upon him, he had forgotten his powerful helper.! 
One day Fox appeared to him, and said, “What are you doing here? 
I am surprised to see you remain’ here’ Alame’r answered, “I have no 
means of leaving this place, and I am starving” Fox said, “I will help 
yous” and thereupon he changed Alamé'r so that he became small and light, 
and then told him to jump on his back. Fox then plunged into the water 
and swam away. After swimming four days and four nights, he reached the 
shore, and on parting said to Alamer, “Why do you forget your helper? 
Remember your great friend and helper, and call on him” All his past 
history now came to his mind. 
He travelled some distance, and came to the house of the chief whose 
nieces he had delivered. He claimed them; but the chief said, “Two other 
men also claim them. 1 will assemble the people and hold a council” All 
the people assembled, and the two chiefs told their story, and Alame’r told 
his; and as his agreed with that told by the women, and since he also 
produced the ring and handkerchief as proofs, all the people said, “He has 
spoken the truth” The chief gave him the two women, while the two lying 
chiefs were seized and killed. Then Alame’r went away, and told the chief 
that in four days he would return for his wives. 
Some say alto all former acts of his life,  

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 733 
He called his helper and said to him, “By your help I have obtained 
the chief's nicces as my wives. Now, as you have helped me so much, I 
give one of them to you to show my gratitude” His helper answered, “If 
I take a wife, I shall lose my power. 1am very wise now. This is because I have not known women’ Being pressed, however, he at last assented. 
On the fourth day Alamer's helper made two fine horses, and, putting on 
fine clothes, he and Alamer rode to the chief's house. Alamé'r told the 
chief that he would give one of his wives to his friend. The chief assented, 
and gave them the girls and a carriage to ride in. He also gave them 
harness and presents of money. Bidding good-by to the chief, they drove to Alam@’r’s country, and arrived at his father's house. His father recognized 
him and was surprised. Alam&r kissed his father and said, “¥ou thought [ 
was dead. It was my dog's heart you ate, and not mine His father was 
ashamed, and also glad that his son was alive, for he had repented of his 
harshness towards him. Henceforth Alame’r lived in his own country, and 
his helper lived there also. Their wives bore many children, and they all 
lived happily together. Alame'r said, “I was foolish formerly, but by travelling 1 became wise.” 
  51. Story oF Butcersy’ ap Winrs-Crigr. 
Butcetsa’! was a lad who lived in a certain village. Far away in 
another country lived many people whose chief? was noted for his wisdom 
and magic. One day Butcetsa, who had great magical powers, told his 
friends that he intended to go and steal the wife of White-Chief; but his 
friends told him that White-Chicf was possessed of great wisdom and magical 
powers, and would certainly discover and kill them. Butcetsa’ asked the 
Wind for his help, and reached the far country very quickly. There he 
transformed himself into a pinto tom-cat, sat down at the chief's door, and 
mewed. The chief's wife saw him, and said, “Oh, what a nice cat! 1 must 
have it for a pet” She kept it and loved it very much. 
Some time afterwards the people of a distant place invited the chief and his people to a great feast. White-Chief's wife refused to go, saying, 
“I must stay and look after my cat” When all the people had gone, Butcetsa’ resumed his natural form, and induced the woman to run away with him. 
When WhiteChiet returned, he followed their tracks, and soon gained 
on them. When they saw that he would overtake them, Butcetsa’ caused a house to appear near the trail, in which they took up their abode. He also 
  
He is said (0 have been an Indian. The meaning of his name is unknown, © Their chief was called White-Chief, snd most Indians think that he and his people were probably whites,

----

734 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
changed the woman's appearance so that she had sunken eyes and was very small of stature. White-Chief asked the lad if he had seen a man and 
woman pass that way, and he answered, “No.” White-Chief said, “The tracks 
of those I pursue end here. Have you any wife? Butcetsd’ answered, “Yes, 
I have a wife. She is inside the house” White-Chief went in to see her; but, as she bore no resemblance to his lost wife, he had no suspicions, and 
returned home. Butcetsa’ took the woman to his own country. 
Afier a time he heard that White-Chicf had married again, so he 
determined to steal his new wife also. He assumed the shape of a rooster, 
appeared before  White-Chief’s house, and crowed.  White-Chief's wife 
rushed out, saying, “Oh, what a fine bird! Its colors are so beautiful, and 
it crows so loudly! I must keep it for a pet” It crowed every morning. 
The chief's wife lived in a house apart, for she was menstruating. Then 
Butcetsa’ assumed his natural form, and induced the woman to run off with 
him. On the following morning, when the rooster did not crow as usual, 
the chief visited his wife's lodge to see what was the matter. He found 
her gone, and followed her tracks. When the couple saw that they would 
be overtaken, Butcetsa’ caused a house to appear near the trail, which he 
entered with the woman. He gave her the appearance of a very old woman 
with sore eyes. White-Chief came along, following the tracks. When he 
found that they ended at the house, he thought that they must be there, 
and determined to search for them. He asked the lad if there was any 
woman inside. Butcetsa’ answered, “No, only my mother” The chief was 
unable to recognize the woman as his wife, and, since he found no one else 
there, he returned home. Butcetsa’ took this woman to his own country also, 
and now he had two wives. He said, “The noted White-Chief has neither 
wisdom nor magic.” 
Now he resolved to steal the chief's horses. He went there at night, 
rounded them all up, and drove them away. On the following morning 
White-Chief missed them, and started in pursuit. When Butcetsa’ saw that he would be overtaken, he caused a house to appear on the trail, and 
changed all the horses into those of white color. When White-Chief arrived, 
he saw a large band of white horses grazing near a house. Seeing that the 
tracks ended there, and thinking that these could not possibly be his horses, he turned back. Butcetsa’ drove the horses to his own country, and shortly 
afterwards, when he heard that White-Chief had another band of horses, stole them in the same way. This time he transformed them all into 
picbalds, and the chief was unable to identify them. When White-Chief 
obtained more horses, Butcetsa’ stole them again, changing them into “blacks.” 
A fourth time when he stole his horses, he changed them into “buckskins.” 
Now White-Chief offered a great reward for the discovery of the horse- 
thief. As he could not be a great chief without having plenty of horses,

----

“TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 735 
he made up his mind to spend the last of his money to buy some more. 
Then Butcetsa’ drove all his buckskin, black, piebald, and white horses to 
White-Chief's country, and sold them to him. White-Chief asked him how he had obtained so many fine horses: and 
Butcetsa’ answered, “Why, that is easy. 1 go to the horse country and 
drive them away.” White-Chief asked how to get there; and Butcetsa’ said, “I will tell you, if you will promise to tell no one. I get a friend to take me 
out in a bark canoe to the middle of the large lake, where he puts me into 
a sack with a stone as a sinker, and, after tying a rope to the sack, he 
lowers me down. When I reach the bottom of the lake, I walk along until 
I reach the entrance to the country which is inhabited by horses! It is a 
fine large country, and there they are very tame. 1 take as many as I 
want, and drive them along a trail which comes out through the carth at 
the bottom of a hill a long ways from here. Then I close up the hole, 
and return by a short cut, which is the lake route. I enter the sack, after 
taking away the sinker, and, giving a tug on the rope, my friend pulls me 
up into the canoe again. Afterwards, at my leisure, I travel around to where 
1 left the horses, and drive them home. This is the way I get them.” 
White-Chief desired to get horses in the same manner, and asked him 
if he would accompany him in the canoe. Butcetsa’ took him to the middle 
of the lake, where he put him into a sack with a stone for a sinker, and 
lowered him into the lake. Then he cut the rope, and the chief was 
drowned. Now Butcetsa’ drove away the horses he had sold, and joined his 
two wives. White-Chief’s people said they were glad that he had disappeared, for he was so foolish; and they elected another chief, who had more sense. 
52. THE LAD AND THE CANNIBALS 
A cannibal and his wife lived in a house on a mountaintop. He possessed a great light! like the moon, which he put up at night; and it shone so brightly, and was so placed, that it could be seen from every part of the world. 
In the neighboring country lived a lad who made up his mind to steal the cannibals light. He took some iron on his back, and repaired to the cannibal’s house, which he entered. The cannibal and his wife were of very 
ferocious appearance, and wore earrings of men’s testicles. As soon as the lad came inside, the cannibal seized him, and was going to cut him up; but 
  
+ Some say also by cate. ¢ See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 93, 94. * Some say this cannibal was the moon, or the spirit controling the moon. His light is said to have been the moon, which he hag up on a pole every night, so that her light was shed in every place. Some say the pole was used by him as a staf in the daytime.

----

736 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
his wife restrained him, saying, “He is too lean. Let him be for a time. 
We will eat him later on, when he gets softer and fatter.” 
The cannibal put him in a box, and fed him morning and evening. 
Each day, when he went out to hunt people, he instructed his wife not to 
open the box during his absences but she paid no attention to his commands, 
and, as soon as he disappeared, she would open the lid of the box, and 
amuse herself by playing with the lad's testicles. Then the lad ‘would have 
an erection, and say, ‘I am sick. My penis is sick” And she would say, 
“I will give you medicine. 1 will cure you” And thereupon she would have 
connection with him. Thus she acted every day, and finally she would give 
the lad his liberty during her husband's absence, locking him up again before 
his return. 
The lad used this time to make a coffin of the iron that he had taken 
along, and the cannibal wondered that it was assuming a different form. He 
said to his wife, “That is a strange kind of material: it assumes a different 
shape and grows day by day” His wife said, “Yes. That is the mystery 
of the lad. It is his guardian power.” 
One night, after the lad had finished the coffin, the cannibal became very curious about the iron, and said, “There must be much magic about 
it” So he asked the lad what it was for, and what it could do. He 
answered, “That is a bed. Any one who lies in it becomes wise and wealthy, 
and also obtains the most pleasant and valuable of dreams” The cannibal 
said, “I will try it” and lay down inside. The lad put on the lid, which 
was also of iron, and locked the coffin, telling the cannibal that he would 
not be able to dream unless the lid was on. 
The cannibal lay quiet, and the lad made a huge fire all around the 
coffin. When it became hot, the cannibal cried and struggled to get out; 
but the lad heated the box red hot, until the cannibal was burned to death. 
Then he killed his wife, and, burning their house, he returned home, taking 
the great light with him and the cannibal’s magic fiddle.

----

XV. — MYTHS OF THE NORTH THOMPSON SHUSWAP. 
53. Covore Tavs. 
Coyote and his Nephew. 
Coyote was living with his nephew. Both were married. He took a 
fancy to his nephew's wife, and wished to have her for himself. He went 
to the top of a low cliff, where he defecated, and transformed his excrement 
into a nest of young eagles. Now he informed his nephew that he had 
discovered an eagle's eyry, and he proposed that the young man should 
climb up to get some caglefeathers. He persuaded him to leave his clothes 
at the bottom of the cliff, saying, “You will get hot climbing, for it is warm 
weather, and it will be so much easier to climb without them. If I were young and active, | should go myself, but now I am old and stiff” 
The young man soon approached the top of the cliff; for it was low, 
and casy of ascent. Then Coyote raised his eyelids, and the cliff increased 
in height. He did so again, and the cliff became very rough and high: but 
the young man kept on climbing. Twice more Coyote raised his eyelids, and the top of the cliff was almost out of sight. Coyote now gathered his loose, 
wrinkled skin into knots on his back, so that he should appear smooth and 
young. and, donning his nephew's clothes, went back to the camp, where 
he told his own wife that she was now a widow, as his uncle had fallen off 
the cliff while climbing to the eagle's eyry, and that his body had 
disappeared in a crevice. His nephew's wife would not believe him, however, 
and maintained that he was not her husband.* 
Coyote's nephew had reached the top of the rock after it had ceased 
growing, and found that the eaglets and the eyry were Coyotes dung. 
Seeing no way of escape, he peered over the edge of the cliff, and far 
below saw Spider-Woman and Mouse-Woman gathering hemp-bark. Four times 
he called on them for aid; then they heard him. They began to sing, and 
the cliff decreased in height. Again they sang, and it decreased still more. 
At the end of the fourth song it had sunk down to its original height and 
appearance. Now Coyote’s nephew climbed down and thanked the women 
for delivering him from his dangerous position. He examined the hemp they 
had gathered, and, secing that it was of inferior quality, he plucked out 
some of his pubic hair, threw it on the ground, and a dense thicket of the 
    
+See p. 622. © Some say she believed him, and lived with him as his wife 
[7371

----

738 TEXT, THE SHUSWAP. 
finest quality of hemp-plants sprang up. This he gave the women as a 
reward for their kindness.’ . . 
Coyote and Grisly Bear make the Seasons, and Night and Day? 
Coyote was living in an underground house with Grisly Bear! One 
_ day Grisly Bear said, ‘I do not like so much daylight. I wish to have it 
night always” Coyote answered, “No, that would not do, people would not 
be able to sec. 1 wish it to be light It was in the afternoon, and Grisly 
Bear commenced to sing his magic song, saying, ‘Tce'xa, tee’xa, I wish 
darkness to prevail always. 1 will beat you, Coyote: it shall never again 
be light” Soon darkness came, and Grisly Bear sang, ‘I beat you, Coyote: 
darkness has come, and will always remain” Now Coyote sang, saying, 
“Po’xa, po'xa, 1 wish light to come in the morning; may the night leave!” 
They sang all night, and towards dawn Grisly Bear sang, ‘See, Coyote! I 
have beaten you: never again will it be light, tee’xa, tee’xa” Then Coyote 
sang, and the daylight began to come. He said, “Po’xa, po’xa, see the light 
coming, Grisly Bear! I have beaten you: your powers are not equal to mine.” 
Again Grisly Bear addressed Coyote, saying, “The winters are not long 
enough: I wish them to last as many moons as there are feathers in the til of the ruffed grouse” Coyote objected, saying, “That is far too many. 
You will have it always winter even if you wished for half the number. | 
Grisly Bear believed Coyote, and said, “Very well, let winter be of that length?” Coyote said, “Snow may fall as many moons as there are feathers 
in half the fail of the ruffed grouse,’ and Grisly Bear agreed. Thus it was 
ordained, and Coyote saved the people from having to live in continual 
darkness and everlasting winter. 
Coyote as the Sunt 
The people were dissatisfied with the sun, and thought they would 
make a new one. They appointed Coyote to be the sun. He took up the 
duties, and went his rounds. Whenever he saw married women commit 
adultery or young women fornicate, he would call and let all the people 
know. This angered some of them very much. He also came so near the 
carth sometimes, that the people were almost burned. They deposed him, 
and put Red-Shafted Flicker in his place. Later on the latter laid an egg, 
which was changed into the present-day sun.   
+ The story continues in the same way as among the Fraser River Shuswap (see p. 623). * See p. 25. 3 Some say the black bear. « Some say Coyote proposed there should be half day aad. half night, but Grisly Bear wanted it al night; 0 they tried their powers, and Coyote got the best of it » See F. Boss, Segen der Kootenay (Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fur Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 1891, pp. 161-172).

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 739 
Coyote and his Hosts! 
One winter Coyote visited Kingfisher, but saw nothing in his house to 
eat. He thought to himself, “What will he offer me to cat? He is noted as 
a fisherman, but has no fish in his house” Kingfisher welcomed Coyote, 
and told him to warm himself while he went for some fish. Coyote thought, 
“How does he catch his fish at this season of the year? 1 must go and 
watch him” Kingfisher uttered his peculiar cry and flew into the bushes. 
Soon he came back bringing four small sticks, went to a hole in the ice, 
and dived in. After a short time he came out bringing a fish. He repeated 
this four times, and then went home with his fish. Now he cooked them 
and gave them to Coyote to cat. 
After finishing his repast, Coyote left, and invited Kingfisher to visit 
him on the morrow. The next day Kingfisher went to the house of Coyote, 
who received him kindly and told him to warm himself while he went to 
get some fish. Kingfisher thought, “How can he catch fish? He does not 
know how to fish in the manner | do” So he: followed and watched. 
Coyote gave a ery like the kingfisher, and, running into the bush, got four 
short sticks. With these he went to the waterhole and dived in; but his 
head stuck fast in the ice; and he would have drowned had not Kingfisher 
rushed up and pulled him out. Now Kingfisher addressed him with many 
sarcastic words, showing him the folly of thinking himself capable of doing 
everything. 
Next Coyote visited Fish-Hawk * and Bald-Headed Eagle? Afterwards 
Coyote visited Beaver, who invited him to warm himself while he prepared 
some food. He produced some cambium of the cottonwood-tree, and, putting 
something with it which looked like grease, he set a dishful before Coyote 
to eat. The latter ate his fill, and upon leaving invited Beaver to visit him 
on the morrow. 
When Beaver arrived, Coyote asked him to warm himself while he got 
some food. He went and gathered some cottonwood-bark in a dish, and, 
having no grease, nor anything similar to it, he took all the dried semen 
from under his prepuce and put it in the dish instead. Returning, he placed 
the mess before his guest, and asked him to eat. Beaver looked at it for a 
while, saying nothing: then he arose, emptied the contents of the dish into 
the fire, and took his departure. 
Next Coyote visited Black Bear, who asked him to sit down and warm 
himself. Coyote looked around, but saw nothing in the house to eat. He 
thought, “Black Bear is noted for having plenty of fat, but I see nothing 
  
+ See pp. 627, 638. 2 Here the same incidents are repeated.

----

740 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
that he could offer me Presently Black Bear sat down with his back close 
to the fire, and toasted it until the grease began to run out. When it was 
cooked, he asked Coyote to come and take a bite. Coyote said, “Oh, no! 
if 1 take a bite, I shall kill you” Black Bear answered, “No fear, come and 
eat of my backfat; it will not hurt me” Then Coyote took a bite, and it 
left no mark. He ate his fill, thinking it very fine. Upon leaving, he 
invited Black Bear to his house on the morrow. 
Next day Black Bear visited Coyote, who. in his turn, sat down with 
his back to the fire. His hair commenced to singe, and filled the house 
with a strong odor. Black Bear said, “You will burn your back” but Coyote 
persisted, saying, “Now the grease commences to come. It will soon be 
ready for you to eat” Presently he could stand the pain no longer, and, 
jumping away from the fire, rolled around in agony. Black Bear laughed 
very much, and then went home. leaving his groaning host to think over 
his foolishness. 
But this lesson was not enough for Coyote, who afterwards did the same 
thing when he invited Grisly Bear. Then he visited the Caribou, and in 
turn the Elk, Moose, Buck-Deer, Antelope, Bighorn-Ram, and Buffalo; and 
when they paid back his visits, he tried to feed them in the same way they 
had fed him, and burned his back every time. 
Coyote and Grouse 
Coyote was travelling through the North Thompson country? and, 
coming in sight of four lodges, thought he would visit them. He found 
them occupied by the children of Fool-Grouse, Prairie-Grouse, Ruffed-Grouse, and BlueGrouse. He induced them to gather gum from the trees, and 
gummed their eyes?... 
The mothers returned later on, and, bent on revenge, passed ahead of 
him and hid, one beyond another, at a place where the trail passed along 
the edge of the cliff alongside of a cadon.’... At last Blue-Grouse flew up, and startled him so much that he fell over 
the cliff into the river below. Coyote drifted down with the current until 
he reached the watering-place of the camp where his wife and daughter were 
staying. In the morning his daughter, who went to fetch water, saw his 
body lying on the bank of the river. She ran back and told her mother, 
saying, “Father is lying dead at the watering-place.” Her mother would not 
believe her at first, but at last went down with her. They carried Coyote 
up to the camp, where his wife treated him until he became quite well 
again. After this, he remained for a long time'in the Thompson Indian 
country, where he had drified ashore.   
See p. 629. + The incidents told on p 629 sre here repented.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 741 
Coyote and the Girls) 
Coyote was travelling up Thompson River, conducting the salmon, which 
he first introduced into the country. He was carrying a small pack of 
salmon on his back, wrapped in brush. After some time he came to a place 
where two girls were bathing on the opposite side of the river. He shouted, 
“Do you want any izaii? They asked each other, “What is that? Again 
he asked them, and they said to each other, “Perhaps it is what he is 
carrying on his back” He shouted again, and they said to each other, 
“We better say yes, and find out what it is” When he asked the fourth 
time, they cried, “Yes!” and thereupon he put his penis into the water, and 
it floated across the river, making straight for the girls. One of them cried, 
“See, he has let go his bird!” and just as the other looked, it entered her 
vagina. At once she became sick, and her companion helped her ashore. 
Now they tried to cut Coyote's penis with a stone knife, for it was very 
long; but the knife would not cut. Then Coyote laughed, and shouted, “Cut 
it with swampgrass”” They cut it off close to the girl's body. Then they 
dressed and went home. The girl took to bed... 
Coyote, the Yellow-Bellied Marmots, and Fox? 
Coyote was travelling, and, while passing Yellow-Bellied Marmot's house, 
heard her children singing, “Hihi-hihi” Going up to the house, he found 
four children there alone. When they saw him, they stopped singing. He 
told them to sing as they were doing before. Four times he induced them 
to sing. Then he said, “You sing too much,” and killed them all. 
He took their bodies and carried them to a spot where there was 
plenty of firewood. Here he lighted a fire and cooked them on spits before 
it. While they were cooking. he sat down some distance away, where it 
was cool. Now Fox, coming along, saw Coyote sitting there, and made him 
stick to the ground. Then he went up and turned the meat before the fire until it was perfectly cooked. When the marmots were cool enough, he 
commenced to eat them. Coyote was helpless, and said, ‘Friend Fox, spare 
me three” When the latter began to eat the second one. he called out, “Friend Fox, spare me two!” When the Fox was cating the third oe, he 
    
' See p. 630; also E. Sapir, Wishram Text (Publictions of the American Eihmological Society, Vol. IT, p. 11); F. Boas, Traditions of the Tillamook (Journal of American Folk-Lore, Vol. XI, pp. 140, 141). ® The res of the story is exacly Ike that of the Thompson Indians, except that Coyote comes down the river in a canoe of horsetail reeds. When the people rush to the sweathouse to catch him, Cas ina 35 Coyote comes om he caches Ne penis but Coyote deals hm 2. blow on the head hich knocks him over. Since that time the head of the Canada jay has always had & whitish top (sce James Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 28). 3 See p. 633 
     

----

742 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
called, “Friend Fox, spare me one!” but the latter paid no attention, and 
commenced on the last one. Then Coyote said, “Friend Fox, spare me the 
entrails” but Fox ate all, and then left. When he had gone away a good 
distance, he let Coyote loose; and the latter, being very angry, started in 
pursuit. 
Fox felt sleepy after his heavy meal, and lay down in the grass to have 
a nap. Then Coyote set fire to the grass, intending to burn him. Owing 
to the heat of the fire, some horse-tail reeds burst near where Fox was; but, 
on account of the smoke, Coyote could not see what was happening. When 
he heard the noise, he said, “Now I am avenged. Those are Fox's eyes 
that are bursting” He went away; but Fox made good his escape, sat down 
some distance away, and laughed at him. Coyote chased him, and four 
times set fire to the grass, trying to burn him; but each time he escaped, 
and Coyote at last gave up the attempt. 
Story of Coyote and Fox quarrelling 
Coyote was lonely, and said, “I will go to sce my friend Fox. I have 
not seen him for a long time” He travelled towards the locality where 
Fox lived, and met him on the way. Coyote had on a robe of magpie- 
skins, while Fox wore the finest robe in the whole country. It was made 
of the most beautiful silverfox skins, and glistened in the sun; it was 
ornamented with eagle tail-feathers, and had many long tassels of colored 
hair. Coyote saluted Fox, and talked friendly to him; but he made no 
reply, and never seemed to notice Coyote, who accosted him four times. 
Now Coyote became angry, took Fox's robe away, and said, “Thus I treat 
people who will not talk to me” When Fox paid no heed, Coyote tore up 
his own robe, and put on that of Fox. He walked off with it, and strutted 
around, vain of his beautiful appearance. He prayed for wind, because he 
wished to admire the fluttering feathers. A little wind came, and he was 
delighted to see the feathers utter. Now he climbed a hill, because he wished for more wind, but there was not enough to suit him. He asked 
for more, so that the tassels might flutter more strongly. Gradually the 
wind increased, but still he was not satisfied. He said, “I wish it would 
blow harder, that the feathers and tassels may stand out like streamers” 
Now a whirlwind came, which took Coyote up and turned him over and 
over. He clutched at everything in his way, and at last caught hold of a 
horsetail reed, to which he clung. The whirlwind passed, leaving Coyote 
exhausted and naked. He looked, and saw it taking the robe over to where 
Fox was. When it reached him, Fox put his robe on, and it became calm. 
  
+See p. 634.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 743 
Thus Fox got back his robe: and, as he was wearing it afterwards, when 
he was transformed into an animal, the silverfox has the most valuable of 
all skins. 
Coyote and Salmon! 
Coyote built an underground house on the Upper North Thompson 
River, at a place now called “Coyote's House” It was afterwards turned 
into rock, and may be seen there at the present day. He spent several 
winters at this place. One fall, salmon came up the river in great numbers; and he made up his mind to catch a large supply, saying, “I will dry very 
many, and then will invite all the people to a great feast” By the time 
the salmon ceased running, he had filled many sticks, and was delighted 
when he viewed the large amount of fish he had on hand. One day as he 
was passing underneath the sticks where they were hanging, his hair caught 
in one of them, and this made him angry. Four times this happened, and 
each time he became more angry. The last time he became very angry, saying, “Why can't I pass underneath these fish without their catching in my 
hair? He tore down the offending salmon and threw it into the river. At once it came to life and swam away. Then all the salmon came down 
from the sticks and plunged into the river. In vain Coyote tried to stop 
them by catching them and clubbing them. In a short time they had all 
disappeared, and he was left without supplies for the winter, and had to give up the project of giving a feast. Now he gathered up all the slabs of 
wood which he had used for splitting salmon on, and all the poles on which 
they had been hanging. He took them up to his house, and said, “I will 
boil them in the wintertime and have fish-soup.” 
Coyote and the Cannibal. 
Coyote was travelling, and came to a cafon through which flowed a 
river. Below, on the same side where he was, he saw a canoe drawn up 
on the shore. Presently three old cannibals and a young one approached 
from above. They were going to cross in the canoe that lay below. 
Coyote transformed himself into a log that stretched across the cation. When 
the cannibals reached the spot, they said, “See! there is a log lying across 
the cafion. Why not cross on it instead of using our canoe? It will be so 
much casier” When they were on the middle of the log, Coyote turned 
over and precipitated the cannibals into the torrent below, where they were 
  
1 See p. 637; also Kwakiutl (see Boas, Indiasische Sagen, pp. 174, 209), Haida (sce Swanton, Haida Texts, Vol. X of this series, pp. 304, 322), Tsimshian (see Boas Tsimshian, Text, p. 32).

----

744 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
all drowned excepting the young one, who got ashore quite exhausted. 
Coyote made him prisoner, and thought he would keep him as a slave for 
a while. Whenever the young cannibal followed Coyote, he would snap and 
bite at him; and when he was made to walk ahead, he would go in the 
wrong direction, and Coyote had much trouble with him. At last they 
arrived at a village of Cannibals; and here Coyote left him, saying to the people, “My slave is of great value, and you must take good care of him. 
1 will leave him in your charge for a short time, while I go and meet my 
friend, whom I will bring here to camp with you to-night” That night. 
when all were asleep, Coyote returned, blew on the Cannibals, and thus 
killed them all. 
Coyote snowed in 
One fall Coyote was fishing at his fishing-place on the Upper North 
Thompson River, near his underground house. He caught a large number 
of salmon, and, after they were all dry, he carried them up to his house. 
When he had taken in the last ones, it began to snow, and continued until 
finally the snow was nearly as high as the trees all around Coyote's house. 
Coyote thought, “This is a very hard winter, the deer will all die, and I 
shall have much food in the spring” Many months passed, and Coyote 
became tired of the continued snow. His stock of dried fish was nearly 
exhausted. He said, “This is a very long winter” He went to the top of 
the ladder and looked around, but the snow nearly hid the trees all around 
his house. A snow-bird came and gave him a ripe berry, saying, ‘Why are 
you living here? It is summertime.” « Coyote laughed, and said, ‘Oh, no! 
see the snow all around! It is still the middle of winter” Again a snow- 
bird came and gave him a ripe berry, saying, “See! the berries are ripe, 
and you are still in your winter house Coyote answered, “You liar! How 
can the berries be ripe and the snow lie nearly as deep as the treetops? 
Four times the snow-birds brought him ripe berries, and then he thought there was something wrong. He put on his snowshoes and climbed over the 
snowdrift. On the other side the snow rapidly decreased in depth. Soon 
he discarded his snowshoes, and in a short time came to bare ground. Then 
be arrived at’ a place where the trees were budding, and after a while he 
found some in leaf. Continuing his journey down the North Thompson 
valley, he passed many serviceberry bushes in blossom, and before long 
came to some with ripe berries. At last he came toa large berry-patch, and while regaling himself there, he heard two women singing. 
Now he changed himself into a boy, and called out, ‘Come here! 
  
+ See F. Boas, Kathlamet Texts, pp. 216 et seq.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 745 
There are many ripe service-berries, very large” The women hastened to 
the place, but Coyote hid himself. The women, seeing neither boy nor 
large ripe berries, returned to where they had been picking. Again he called them, and they went to the spot, without being able to find him. 
This was repeated four times. The fourth time he showed himself, and 
said, “The berries are near by, I will take you to them; but you must be 
very hot after walking to and fro so often; you had better take off your 
clothes and cool yourselves” As the women felt quite hot, and were not 
ashamed in the presence of a small naked boy; they took off their clothes and sat down on them. Coyote said, “While you are cooling yourselves, I 
will louse your heads.” To this they assented; and Coyote, by lousing their 
heads, made them so sleepy that they eventually fell sound asleep. Then 
Coyote had connection with them, put on their clothes, and left them. When 
the women awoke, they were cold, for the sun had set. They searched for their clothes in vain, and had to go home naked® with their berries. They 
said, “That boy must have been Coyote.” 
Coyote and his Wives. 
Coyote was living with a friend, who had a very pretty wife. He 
became enamored of her, and killed his friend, so that he might gain 
possession of her. When the woman refused to go with him, he said to 
her, “I have even killed my friend to gain you, then why should I spare 
you if you do not obey my wishes? She became afraid and went with him. 
He said, “To-morrow 1 will hunt, that you may have fresh meat to eat.” On 
the next morning he hunted, and in the evening returned with two fawns, — 
one for her, and one for himself, — but he ate them both. Then he said, 
“You are only my slave, and not my wife, I will seck a real wife, and 
Killed her. Soon afterwards he saw a man and his wife, and, after casting a spell 
over the man which put him to sleep, he killed him and took possession of 
the woman. He said to her, “To-morrow I will hunt, that you may have 
meat to eat” On the following morning he hunted, and brought back two 
fawns, which he ate himself. Now he told the woman that she was only his 
slave, and not his wife, and that he wanted a real wife. Then he killed her. 
Again Coyote stole a wife by foul means (my informant had forgotten the 
exact manner in which he obtained her). He killed two fawns, which he 
ate himself. Then he said, “To-morrow we will shift camp; but in the 
morning the woman had a swelled leg, and could not walk. Again he 
  
+ Some sty Coyote bad a magpie robe, which be tore up before dressing in the women's skin clothes. The women found the feathers, and knew it must have been Coyote; others say they (ook the feathers and tied them in front of them; while sil others say they made aprons of rbrush.

----

746 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
hunted, and killed two fawns, but on the following morning the woman was 
still unable to walk. This happened four times; then he said to her, “You 
are my slave, and not my wife,” and killed her. 
Again Coyote got a wife by foul means, and killed her (my informant 
had forgotten this part of the story). 
Now Coyote could find no more people, and at last made up his mind 
to take a corpse for his wife. He went to a graveyard and dug up the 
body of a woman. He opened her eyes, but they would shut again. Then 
he treated her as shamans treat sick people, and she moved a little. He 
continued to do so, and her eyes opened. He said, “There is sufficient life 
in her and placed her in a sitting posture. He talked to her, and said, ‘I 
will go hunting and bring you food” He returned with two fawns, cooked 
them, and offered her some meat to eat. Now he made her lie down, saying, “To-morrow we will move camp.” When day came, he said, “Arise, wife, we will shift camp,” but she never moved. Again he said, “Make haste, wife, and arise, we must shift camp’ and thus he addressed her four times, 
but she never moved. Now he got angry and struck her with his fist on 
the cheek, saying, “Thus I treat a disobedient wife’ Again he struck her 
with his fist on the other cheek; but his hand slid off, taking off the rotten 
flesh, and exposing the bone. 
54. OLD-ONE. 
In the beginning the Indians did not know anything about foreign lands, 
nor did they know that there were any other people in the world different 
from themselves. At that time there lived in the upper world’ a great 
chief who was possessed of wonderful powers. He was an old man, and 
very good-hearted and wise. + It is said that at that time people did not die, 
but that, owing to some cause not now remembered, the only son of the old 
chief died, and that since then people have died. One generation disappeared 
after another. The old chief was very sorrowful, and thought to himself, 
“Where has my son gone? He cannot really be dead, he has only left. He 
is not here. Where may he have gone to? There must be some land to 
which he has gone. I will seek that land and try to find him.” 
“Then Old-One began to travel, and visited many lands. He came first 
to the Shuswap country, where he searched for his son. He saw that the 
people were very ignorant: so he taught them how to fell trees, make twine, 
sew clothes, make needles and awls, hunt game, trap, dig roots, and gather 
berries; and thus the condition of the people was much improved. He did 
not teach them how to catch salmon, for there were none of these in the 
  
+ Some say in the Shuswap country.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 747 
Shuswap country: the Coyote introduced them at a later date, and taught 
the people how to fish for them. 
After travelling all through the Shuswap country, Old-One, who was 
also known by the names of Spelkamu/lax and Semé/mp,! disappeared. Upon 
his return, many years afterwards, it was learned that he had in the mean 
while travelled through six other lands in search of his son. He described 
these other lands to the Indians, who now for the first time learned that 
there were other countries, inhabited by beings different from themselves. 
The first land he travelled through was inhabited by people who never 
slept as we do. When one of them fell asleep, the others thought he was 
dead, and buried him. He taught them’ how to sleep. In the next land 
he visited, the men cut open the bellies of pregnant women, in this way 
killing the mothers while delivering the children. He taught them the 
natural method of delivery. Then he came to a country where the people 
were afraid of fish, but caught and ate frogs and toads, thinking they were 
fish. He taught them which were fish? and how to catch and cook them. 
After that he came to a country where people all looked alike, and where 
there was no proper distinction of sex! He taught them the proper sexes. 
Next he arrived in a country where the people were cannibals and ate many 
curious kinds of food. They lived in high houses, had horses and wagons, 
and were divided into classes. Here he saw priests dressed in black robes, 
who told the people wonderful things. He taught these people not to be 
cannibals, and the priests were angry with him® Finally he came to a 
country where the water was always warm, the sun very close to the ground, 
and the people were burned black. They were also cannibals, and lived in 
the water to escape the heat. He taught them the proper food to eat, and 
removed the sun farther away, so that they could live on land. He also 
made the water cool and refreshing.’ 
At last he returned to the Shuswap country, where he remained a long 
time. After telling the people that there was still much that was bad in 
  
© See p. st, 652. #1 obtained ‘a few further details of this incident, which corresponds to the Lillooet story of the Frog people. Old-One came to & marsh where a number of men were hunting frogs. He waiched them for a time; and after they had finished hunting and were going home losded with meat and skins of frogs, he asked them what they intended to do with these. They answered, “The skins we use for cloching, and the meat we est.” He told them these things were not proper food and clothing for human beings, and ssid he would show them proper food. Next morning he brought some fish to their house and threw them down on a mat. When the people saw the fih, they all ran away in terror, bat one old person was too decrepit to run. OL-One cooked the fish, and gave some. to the cripple to eat, who, findiog it good in taste, and experiencing no evil efects, helped Old-One to persusde. the others to try it. Eventually they all ate of the new food, and then, feeling a disgust for the frog-meal, threw all of the latter awsy. 3 Many Tndians think that this must have been Chins. « Some say the men were women, and the women men; while others asset that all were men who were, addicted to sodomy. is is said to have been the country of the whites. This is said to have been the country of the negroes or of the Kanakas.     
   

----

748 TET, THE SHUSWAP. 
their country," and that their lot could be improved considerably, he promised to send a great man (Coyote) to live among them, and to transform the evil features of the country, that they might live easier and happier. Then Old-One disappeared, saying he would return. Many say that he continued 
to travel in search of his son, and at last, after having visited every country, he went to the only remaining one, the land of the dead, where he found his son.’ 
55. Tue Goat Wom. 
A Goat who had his home in the high mountains visited the people, 
married a woman, and took her home with him. When they came to the 
bottom of the great cliff on top of which the Goats had their house, the 
woman was unable to climb it. The Goat said to her, “Your shoes are not 
of the right kind, 1 will give you good shoes for running on the cliffs, I 
will give you shoes of the Goat people” He then put goats’ hoofs on the 
woman, and she became able to climb the cliffs. 
In due time the woman bore a son, who grew very fast and was very 
clever. He begged of his parents to be taken to his grandparents, whom he 
was anxious to see. The Goat told his wife to take their son to her parents, 
and supplied them with many hoofs full of goat-meat and goat-skins. 
When they arrived among the people, they emptied out the hoofs; and the 
minute particles of goat-flesh and goatskin that were contained in them 
assumed their natural proportions, and furnished the people with much meat 
and with skins for bedding. The woman and the Goat boy staid with the 
people a whole year, and then returned to the Goats. They never visited 
the people again, and were finally transformed into real goats. 
56. SKUNK AND PORCUPINE. 
Porcupine saw Skunk approaching, and said to himself, “He might kill 
me. 1 will pretend I am dead” He lay down, pretending to be dead, and 
held in his breath. Skunk saw him, and said, “What kind of thing is this? 
It may be good to eat, but I am a little afraid of it. However, I will take 
it along, as it seems to-be quite dead; and if it acts in any strange manner, 
I can easily let it go” He fastened a thong to one leg of Porcupine and 
carried him on his back. Soon Porcupine raised his quills and scratched 
Skunk's back. Skunk said, “That is strange!” Then Porcupine stung Skunk 
  
+ Some say, “after telling them that many evil things would grow up." + Some say that he remained there and became the chief of the dead. Others assert that he returned fo the, upper world. The story in its present form is evidently strongly influenced by Christan. teachiags and by the expericncees of the tribe during the last century.   
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 749 
with his quills. Skunk dropped him and ran away, saying, “That indeed is 
a strange creature. He might kill me if I carried him far” 
57. Tre War with THE Sky Prorie.! 
Black Bear and Wolverene were great chiefs, the former of the Fish 
people, the latter of the Bird people. They assembled the warriors of all the fishes and birds of the earth to go on a war expedition against the people 
of the sky. All the men shot their arrows up towards the sky, but they 
fell back without hitting it. Last. of all, Wren? who was the smallest of all 
the birds, shot an arrow, which stuck in the sky. The next smallest bird 
shot an arrow, which hit the end of the first one; and thus they shot arrows; 
and one stuck in the end of the other, until there was a chain of arrows 
forming a ladder from earth to sky. On this all the warriors ascended, 
leaving the two chiefs to guard the bottom. Soon after all had reached the 
sky world, Wolverene and Black Bear began to laugh at each other's tails. 
Black Bear grew angry, chased Wolverene around the foot of the ladder, 
struck against it, and knocked it down. 
Meanwhile the earth people had attacked the sky people, and at first 
were victorious; but afterwards the latter, gathering in great force, routed 
the carth people, who fled in great disorder towards the top of the ladder. 
By its fall their retreat was cut off; and many made a stand against the sky 
people, while others threw themselves down. The birds were able to reach 
the earth safely, for they could fly down; but many of the fishes, who tried 
to throw themselves into a large lake, were wounded. In their fall some 
missed the lake and dropped on rocks. Thus the skull of the sematsa’i 
came to be flattened, the kwa'ak broke its jaw, the tcoktci'tcin got a bloody 
mouth, and the sucker had all its bones scattered and broken, so that it 
died. The grandson of a man called Tcet gathered the bones, put them 
back into the body, and revived it. This is the reason why the sucker 
has now so many bones scattered through its flesh, why the sematsa’i has 
a flat head, the tcokici'tcin® a red mouth, and why the mouth of the kwa‘ak 
appears to be broken. The earth people who remained above were all slain, 
and transformed by the sky people into stars. 
58. SKUNK AND BADGER. 
Skunk and Badger lived together, with their two sons. The former 
said, “Our sons have been able to shoot well for a long time, and are now 
  
  + See Boas, Indianische Sagen, p. 17; also Sagen der Kootenay (Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft fir Anthropologie, Edbmologie und Urgeschichi, 1801, pp. 161-172). + Some say Humming Bird, others Chickadee. * The Shuswap in many parts of the country do not eat this fish. « See Boas, Kathlamet Texts, p. 13.

----

750 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
old enough to learn to hunt. We will take them with us to-morrow when 
we go hunting” On the following day they took the lads out hunting; and 
when they found some deer, Skunk told his son to shoot them, as they 
were deer and the proper kind of meat to eat. Badger would not let his 
son shoot at them, saying, “These are not deer: they are people, and not 
fit for food” Soon afterwards they found some people, and Badger told his 
son to shoot them, saying they were deer; but Skunk would not let his son 
shoot at them, and told Badger he was wrong, for they were people. 
Badger would not believe him, however; and thenceforth when the young 
men hunted, the one always killed deer and ate their meat, while the other 
killed people and ate their pubes (skomits). Almost every night the fathers 
quarrelled in their lodge about the propriety of killing and eating deer or 
men. This quarrel was taken up by their sons, who always hunted 
together. 
One morning they went hunting, as usual, and coming to a crossing of 
two trails, at which they intended to separate, Skunks son placed a small 
stone ‘there, and said to his friend, “This stone will be a sign by which we 
shall know if the other has gone home. Whoever returns here first shall 
take away the stone. Then, when the other comes and sees it gone, he 
will know that he does not need to wait." Shortly after they had separated, 
Skunk’s son, who was angry, returned to the cross-trails and put his guardian 
spirit into the stone. Towards evening Badger's son came along. The 
stone was still there, so he put it in his bosom, and said, “My friend will 
now know that I have gone home” Skunk's guardian spirit went straight into his heart, and he became violently ill. His father tried to cure him, 
and sucked the sickness out of his body. Then Skunk's guardian spirit entered his own heart; and soon both died. 
59. WaTeR-Ouzes, AnD TE Gisty Bears.! 
Water-Ouzel ? said to his grandmother, ‘Give me some food, grandmother. I am going to make a weir to catch salmon” His grandmother smiled, and 
said, “You are so small, you could not make a weir in many seasons. Even 
for your grandfathers, who were large, strong people, it required many days 
of hard work to make one’ However, she gave him some food. He carried 
it to a creek running into the North Thompson River, and, afier eating it, 
he lay down. He used his magic powers, and shouted, “Trees, cut yourselves 
down! and at once they obeyed. Then he said, “Drag yourselves to the 
creek,” and they obeyed. - Next he ordered them to sharpen their ends, tie 
themselves together, and stretch themselves in position across the creek. By   
+ See p. 678; also Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p 75. © Some say Wren.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 751 
the time they had done all this, it was almost dark, and Water-Ouzel 
went home. 
On the following morning he asked his grandmother for a lunch, as he 
was going to fix a place for drying salmon. She laughed at him, and said, 
“What use will that be, when you cannot catch salmon? You are so small, 
if you did catch one, it would run away with you” He went to the creek, 
lay down, and ordered the poles to cut themselves, to drag themselves down, 
and to stand up. At dusk the drying-frame was ready, and he returned home. 
On the following morning he again asked his grandmother for some 
food, saying that he was going to catch salmon. When he reached the 
weir, he lay down and commanded the salmon to be caught, cut, and hung 
upon the drying-poles. At dusk he went home and informed his grandmother, 
who wondered very much, and on the following day went to see the fish. 
There Water-Ouzel discovered that a grisly bear had eaten some of the 
salmon. His grandmother gave him a bow and arrow, and he lay in wait 
for the grisly bear. In the morning it came, and he shot it. When another 
bear came and ate some of the salmon, it met the fate of the first one. 
Thus he killed three grisly bears. The fourth one saw him, and shouted to 
Water-Ouzel, “Don’t kill me!” Therefore he shot the arrow into the water. 
The grisly bear promised not to eat any more of the salmon: therefore 
Water.Ouzel gave the bodies of the other grisly bears to their friend, who 
revived them. Thenceforth the grisly bears troubled Water-Ouzel no more. 
60. WREN.! 
Wren? met BullElk, and asked him for a ride. He answered, ‘Jump 
on my back” When Wren was seated on his back, he commenced to scratch 
him, saying, ‘You have many wood-ticks, grandfather: I will pick them off 
for you” He had a very small knife, and stabbed Elk with it. The latter 
said, “You hurt me, grandchild but Wren answered, “I must hurt you a little, for your ticks have taken a deep hold, and are hard to pull out” 
Thus He continued to cut Elk, who often remonstrated, and at last fell 
down dead. 
As Wren's knife was too small to cut up the carcass, he started for 
home to get a large arrowstone knife from his mother. He felt very happy, 
and sang as he went along, “I have killed Grandfather Elk with my little 
knife. He thought I scratched away his ticks. Now I have plenty of meat.” 
Wolf? heard him singing, and knew that Wren must have killed something. 
She ran out and intercepted him. When they met, she asked Wren what 
  
3 Se el Taian ofthe Thompson River Indian, 16; Furand, Trion of he Cie Tow 4 + Some s5y Some say a heowolf, othes 4 she-woll. 
 

----

752 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
he was singing about; and the latter answered, “I was singing about my 
rags hanging down” Wolf said, ‘You little liar, you were singing about 
some meat you had. If you do not tell me where it is, I will eat you” 
Wren asserted that he had sung about his rags, and if Wolf thought he had sung about meat, she must have misunderstood him. Wolf grew angry and 
swallowed Wren, who after some time emerged from her anus. Again Wolf questioned him, and Wren asserted that he had only sung of his rags. Once 
more Wolf swallowed lim, but again Wren emerged from Wolf's anus. 
This happened four times. Then Wolf said, “You shall no longer escape. 
Next time 1 will chew you between my teeth before I swallow you” Now 
Wren told him that he had killed an clk, and revealed the place where the 
carcass lay, and which happened to be near Wolf's house. Wolf said, ‘I 
have a good knife, and will go and cut up the elk” Wren accompanied 
her; and when they reached the spot, he said, “As you cut off each piece, 
1 will carry it to your children. Wolf agreed to this; and, as each piece 
was cut off, Wren carried it away. Instead of carrying it to Wolf's children, 
however, he took all the pieces to a ledge of a rock near by, which Wolf 
could not reach. When he had deposited all the good meat in the cliff, he 
did not return, but busied himself heating pebbles on the ledge, with which 
to cook the meat, and called all the birds to a feast. Only the entrails, 
heart, and liver of the elk remained; and as Wren did not return to take 
these, Wolf went home in search of him. There she found that Wren had 
not taken any meat there; therefore she went to look for him, accompanied 
by her children. When they reached the cliff, they found Wren busy 
cooking the meat, and the other birds all assembled on the ledge. Wolf 
demanded her meat; and Wren said, “Open your mouth, and I will drop 
a piece down to you” Wolf opened her mouth, and Wren let drop the 
tripe, which was boiling hot. This burned Wolf's insides and killed her. 
Then Wolf's children said, “Give us the meat belonging to our mother.” and 
Wren told them to open their mouths. They obeyed, and he dropped scraps 
of hot meat into each of their mouths, and thus killed them all. When the 
rest of the meat was cool, the birds had a great feast. 
61. SkuNK AND FisHEr. 
Two women were sent by their parents to marry Fisher, who lived in 
the same house with Skunk. Their fricnds warned them before they left, 
saying, ‘When you reach Fisher's house, you must not laugh at Skunk 
when he breaks wind, for that is natural to him. If you laugh at him, he 
will certainly take you for his wives.” The women reached their destination, 
  
+ Instead of stones of ordinary size, Wren used tiny pebbles for cooking.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 753 
while Fisher was away hunting. Skunk was splitting wood, and, as he broke 
wind with every blow, they could not contain their laughter. Skunk felt 
insulted, and threatened to kill them with his stench unless they consented to 
become his wives. Fisher returned home during the night, and found Skunk 
fast asleep, with a woman on each side. Fisher pinched the women and 
whispered in their ears, advising them what to do. Accordingly they arose, 
and put two blocks of wood in their places. Following Fisher, they went 
to a cliff overlooking Tcexpa'tiwaten Lake.! Skunk followed them. Seeing 
their reflection in the lake, he thought they were there, and discharged his 
obnoxious fluid on the water four times, thinking to kill them. They laughed 
at him from their retreat in the cliff above, and, on looking up, he saw them 
making faces at him. Then he felt very much ashamed, and hastened away. 
62. Rep-Heapep Wooppecker AND His Wives. 
Red-Headed Woodpecker had two wives, — the elder one, Grisly Bear; 
and the younger, Beaver. One day he accompanied his elder wife on a 
root-digging trip. He hunted all day without success, and at sunset returned to where his wife was. She said, “You are tired. Rest awhile, and I will 
louse your head” She caught the lice with snares, and nets like those set 
for woodpeckers at their holes in trees... 
63. SNA'NAZ AND SeveN-HEaps.! 
Sna'naz lived with his two brothers and his father. One day the latter 
sent him to buy a needle. When he had bought it, he noticed its eye. At 
once he filed it off with a stone, saying, “Of what use is a needle with an eye 
of that kind? Before he had gone very far, he complained of the needle 
being too heavy. He saw two. women gathering tules below the trail, stuck 
the needle into a stem of tule, and said to the women, ‘You aré poor, and 
require a needle for sewing tule mats. Take this one.” When he arrived home, his father asked him for the needle. Sna‘naz 
told what he had done with it, and his father became very angry. His 
brothers said, “Don’t be angry with him, father! You know he is an idiot.” 
Another time his father sent him to buy fat. On his way back he 
complained of the fat being too heavy. He happened to see the bed of a 
small lake which had dried up. He said to himself, “The plants in the lake-" bed look very dry and lean, they need fattening” so he emptied all, the fat 
among them. When he arrived home, his father asked him for the fat; and   
T Pavilion Lae, in Marble Cufon. The nara of (he lake is when from this incident, and appears to mean “place where some one broke wind over the water” (se Tet, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 45) 2The res of the story continues like the sory on p. 681 of this volume, 3 See p. 71. This and the following tales are derived from European folklore, 
 

----

754 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
he answered, “I took pity on the plants in the little lake-bed, and gave them the fat, for they needed it” His father was very angry; but his brothers 
said, “Do not scold him, father! You know he is an idiot.” Still another time his father sent him to buy a kettle to boil meat in. 
He bought a fourlegged iron pot, and on the way back complained of its 
being too heavy. He put it down and said, “Why should I carry you? You 
have legs of your own, and can walk. He told it to walk, and then said, 
“We will run? but after running some distance, he looked behind, and saw 
the pot still standing where he had placed it. He returned, and said, “You 
are too slow. I believe you have too many legs. 1 will break one off, 
then you may be better able to run” He broke off a leg and started 
again; but, on looking back, he saw the pot still in the same place. He 
returned, broke off another leg, and thus continued until he had broken oft 
all the legs. Then he left the pot, denouncing it as no good. His father 
got angry with him, as usual, and his brothers made sport of him. 
Then he said to his father, “If you will give me a hunting-knife,! 1 will 
leave you, and you will not be troubled with my foolishness any more” 
His father granted his wish, and he left his home. He had not gone very 
“far, before he met a girl who looked very sorrowful. He asked her where 
she was going; and she answered, “Alas! my father is afraid that Seven- 
Heads the cannibal will eat him, and therefore to pacify him he sends one 
of his children every year to be devoured by him. All my brothers and 
sisters have perished, and now my father orders me to go to Seven-Heads 
to meet my fate’ She added further, “My father is a great chief; and to 
save me and himself, he has offered me in marriage as a reward to any man who will kill Seven-Heads, but all the young men are afraid” Sna‘naz 
looked at the girl, and saw that she was very pretty, and he pitied her. 
He said, “I will accompany you to the cannibal’s house.” When they arrived. 
the girl hid outside while Sna'naz entered. Seven-Heads, who had a very 
ferocious aspect, asked the intruder what he desired; and Sna‘naz answered, 
“I seek you” Seven-Heads answered, “It is not often that men seek me. 
How many mysteries do you possess” Snamaz said, *One only” The 
cannibal laughed, and said, ‘I possess seven. Now let us try our powers.” 
He tried to kill Sna‘naz by his shamanistic powers, but these had no effect. 
Then he tried to seize him; but Sna‘naz struck him with his knife, cutting 
off one of his heads. The cannibal retired, saying, “That is enough” Sna’naz 
“laughed, and said, “You do not seem to care for a long fight” Then he 
cut the tongue out of the head, went outside, and joined the girl, whom he 
accompanied to her house.   
VA short, heavy sword with one cuting-edge imporid by the Hudson Bay Company, snd used by the Indians for cutting brush, and in war. In early days the Indians had somewhat similar weapons made of stone, bane, wood, and antler.

----

TEXT, THE SHUSWAP. 755 
The chief was surprised to see her return, and asked her if she had 
not been to Seven-Heads' house. She replied, “Yes, I was there; but he 
was not hungry to-day, and told me to return on the morrow.” 
The next day she again repaired to the cannibal’s house, and Sna‘naz 
accompanied her. She hid outside, and he entered. The monster addressed 
Sna‘naz as on the first day, and afterwards they fought. Again Sna‘naz cut 
off one of the heads of the cannibal, who retired. He cut out the tongue, 
joined the girl, and accompanied her home. Again her father questioned 
her; and she answered, “Seven-Heads was not hungry to-day, and told me 
to return to-morrow.” Seven times Snamaz accompanied the girl to the 
cannibal's house. Each day he cut off one of the cannibal’s heads, and on 
the last day he killed him. 
Now the chief thought, ‘It is very strange that Seven-Heads has not 
been hungry for the last seven days’ Therefore he sent a slave boy to find out the reason. The slave peered into the cannibal’s house, but he could 
neither see nor hear anything. At last he entered, and found the monster dead, with his seven heads severed from the body. Now it occurred to him 
that he would claim to have killed him, and that he would try to marry the 
chief's daughter. He put the seven heads in a sack, carried them before 
the chief, and told him that he had killed the cannibal. The chief examined 
the heads, and found that they had not all been cut off at the same time. 
Besides, the seven tongues were gone. Therefore he would not believe the 
slave. Another chief who was there said, ‘Ask your daughter: she may 
know something about the cannibal's death.” He asked her, and she related 
the whole story truthfully. The chief inquired where the youth now was, 
but she did not know. Then the chief called all the young men, and 
ordered them to pass in front of his daughter, one after another, that she 
might identify the one who had vanquished Seven-Heads. They all passed 
by, but the girl told her father he was not among them. 
Then some one said to the chief, “There is an ugly, poorly clad stranger 
sitting in your kitchen” The chief asked that he be brought in. When he 
appeared before the girl, she at once recognized him; and when he produced 
the seven tongues in support of her declaration, the chief accepted him as 
his son-in-law, and gave him his daughter and seven very valuable presents. 
Sna'maz had many more adventures after killing Seven-Heads, and became a 
wealthy chief. 
  64. LEEPASKEN AND LEXHEKST. 
The chief of a certain locality! had a very pretty daughter, with whom 
many men had fallen in love; but all her suitors had been killed by her   
"Some say of a foreign people.

----

756 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
father because they had failed to accomplish the tasks that he had imposed 
on them. Now, two young men. called Lhepasken and Lexhekst, agreed 
that they would try to obtain the girl. They had trained until they had 
succeeded in obtaining great mysterious power. They knew the tasks that 
the chief would impose on them. Lexhekst had the wind and water as his 
chief protectors; while Lhepasken, who was very fieet of foot, had secured 
the help of the Antelope and the Buffalo. Before starting they asked for 
the help of the tkokena-Duck and of the Ant, who promised to accompany 
and help them. They concealed the Ant and the Duck in a small basket, 
boarded their bark canoe, and paddled to the other side of the lake, where 
the chief lived. 
As soon as they arrived, they repaired to the chief's house, and 
thepasken at once asked for the hand of the girl. The chief replied, “If 
you can vanquish me by your mysterious powers, you can have my daughter, 
but not otherwise. If you fail in any ofthe tests that I shall arrange, you 
will be in my power, and I will kill both of you. First of all, run a race 
with me.” 
Lhepasken made himself ready, and ran a race with the chief. After 
two steps he was far ahead, and lay down to sleep. The chief passed him, 
and yet he slept. Then Lexhekst shot an arrow at his friend, which, glancing 
off his cheek, awoke him. Looking around, he saw the chief far ahead; but 
in two bounds he passed him, and reached the goal first 
Now the chief gave Lhepasken a large basket full of very small beads 
of four colors, all mixed together, and told him he must sort them out and 
string them, each color by itself, and return them arranged before sunset. 
The two strangers carried the beads away, and took the Ant from their 
canoe, who separated and strung the beads in a very short time;? and the 
young men carried them back to the chief. 
Now the chief took a piece of silver’ threw it far out on the deep 
waters of the lake, and told them to bring it back to him before sunrise the 
next morning. Now the men took the Duck from their canoe at dusk, and he dived for the silver. The fourth time he dived he found it, and before 
sunrise they took the silver to the chief. Now the chief gave them his 
daughter, and they embarked with her in their canoe and paddled home. 
The chief was very angry because he had lost his daughter, and said 
to his young men, “Let us pursue them” The chief's canoe was very swift. 
It was of coiled basketry, and had a stone keel. It was propelled by double- 
bladed paddles, with a rounded blade at cach end. Before long the chief 
  
Many say they were brothers. + Some say thal the Spider, who was also in their canoe, spun threads for the beads, and sirung them while the Ant sorted them out. * Some say copper.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 757 
overtook the two men, and he felt sure he would kill them. Then Lexhekst raised a gale, which drove back the pursuers to the point from which they had 
started. When the wind fell, the chief resumed the pursuit, and before long 
caught up with the fugitives; but again Lexhekst caused a gale to rise behind 
him, which drove back the pursuers. Each gale was worse than the preceding 
one; and when the chief started the fourth time in pursuit, his canoe was 
engulfed by the waves, and he and all his crew were drowned. rhepasken 
reached his home with his bride, and she afterwards bore several children 
to him. 
65. Tre Laps AND THE CANNIBALS. 
A cannibal lived in a house. with his wife and two daughters. One 
day two lads came along and wished to spend the night there. The woman 
told them that if they staid, her husband would eat them; but since they 
insisted, she hid them. When her husband came home, he said, ‘I smell 
deer” Although his wife tried to convince him that he was mistaken, he 
made a search, and soon found the boys. “Ah!” he said, ‘her are two nice 
deer” His wife said, “You must not eat them: they will make husbands for 
our daughters” The cannibal let them go, but made up his mind to kill 
them that night. At bedtime he put them to sleep with his daughters, 
giving two blankets to each couple to sleep in. He put red caps on the 
boys, and white caps on the girls, and made the lads lie down, one on the 
left side of each daughter. Some time after dark, when the girls were asleep, 
the lads moved to the right sides of the girls and changed the caps, putting 
the white ones on themselves. Soon afterwards the cannibal came in and cut 
off his daiighters’ heads with a sword; then, returning to his couch, he said, 
“In the morning I will have a good meal of fresh meat,” for he thought he 
had killed the lads. At daylight he told his wife to go to his daughters’ 
bed and bring the two deer that he had killed in the night, adding, “You 
must cut them up and put them in the kettle to boil” The woman went, 
and found her two daughters with their heads off, and the lads gone. They 
had taken along the blankets. . 
The cannibal started in pursuit, and soon overtook them. When the 
boys saw him coming, they threw behind them one of the blankets, which 
was transformed into a dense thicket, which retarded the cannibal’s progress. 
Again he overtook them, and they threw behind them another blanket, which 
changed into a mass of fallen timber. The third time he caught up with 
them they threw another blanket behind, and it changed into a tract of rough bowlders, through which their pursuer made slow progress. After he 
  
+ See Teit, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 03.

----

758 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
had passed over the bowlders, they threw the last blanket behind them, and 
it changed into a tract of thorny bushes. The cannibal surmounted this 
obstacle also, and drew near again, although he was by this time much exhausted. Then the lads hid in some tall grass. They caused the sun to 
shine hot, until the cannibal, who was overcome with fatigue, lay down in 
the shade of a tree, and soon fell fast asleep." Now the lads stole up to him, took away his magic sword, with which he killed people; his magic 
cap, which gave him wonderful knowledge: and his magic shoes, which 
helped him to travel very fast. Thus they rendered him completely harmless. 
When he awoke and found his mysterious power gone, he gave up the chase 
and returned home. 
  
  + Some say they threw a sleep on

----

APPENDIX. 
Notes oN THE CHILCOTIN INDIANS. 
IntronUCTORY. — The subjoined notes on the Chilcotin Indians were 
mostly gathered in the summer of 1900, when, at the direction of Dr. Boas, 
I visited the tribe for the purpose of making a collection of basketry and 
obtaining explanations of basketry designs. As the main object of my work 
that season was to study the Shuswap of Fraser River, I could spare only 
about two weeks among the Chilcotin, which time I spent in visiting several 
of their main camps in quest of specimens; and consequently on such a 
hurried trip, spent mostly in travelling, I had little opportunity of gaining 
very full information regarding their old-time customs. A little additional 
information 1 have gathered from time to time when on trips through the 
Chileotin country, hunting large game. The old life of the tribe is already 
known to some extent through the researches of Father Morice and 
Dr. Livingston Farrand. 
Hasitat, — The Chileotin (‘the people of the Chilo River’)! form the 
extreme southern extension of the territorially connected tribes composing the main body of the Déné or Athapascan family. From the Chileotin north to 
the neighborhood of the Arctic Ocean, where the Eskimo are encountered, 
none but Athapascan tribes are found. The tribe is called “Dentalia people” 
by the interior Salish, who obtained their supplies of dentalium-shells from 
them. Their habitat is in the central, interior of British Columbia} from 
latitude 51° to 52°30’ north, and between the Frasef River on the east and 
the Cascade Mountains on the west. The western parts of this region 
towards the coast, and the southern district along Upper Bridge River, are 
exceedingly mountainous and rugged. There are several passes, however, 
leading through the Coast Range to inlets of the Pacific. Immediately east 
of the Coast Range, and around the head waters of the Chilcotin River, north 
towards the Blackwater River, the country is mostly a forested plateau of 
considerable altitude. Farther east and south, near the Lower Chilcotin 
River and towards Fraser River, the plateau, although still about four 
thousand feet in height, becomes in most places open and grassy, and the 
    
+ Chileo is the native name of the Chilcotin River, The whites apply this name to the branch of it which issues from Chileo Lake only. See also Maurice, Notes on the Western Dénés (Transactions of the Canadian Institute, Sesion 1892-93, pp. 22, 23). +See map, p. 450.   
[759]

----

760 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
climate is much drier. The valley of the Chilcotin River itself is much 
lower than the plateaus on either side. The snowfall and rainfall, however, 
are not very great in any part of the Chilcotin country excepting on the 
high mountains. 
The neighbors of the tribe on the north are their congeners, the 
Carrier; on the east, the Shuswap; southeast, the Lillooet; and southwest 
and west, a number of coast tribes, — the Sishiatl, Comox, Kwakiutl, and 
Bella Coola. 
The Chilcotin are, or were formerly, divided into three or four septs! of 
which the people of Nacoontloon® Lake seem to have formed onc; the 
people inhabiting the district around Puntzee and Chezikut Lakes, east to 
Alexis Creek, another; the people south of Chileotin River, a third; and 
probably those living around Tatla Lake, a fourth. At the present day the 
whites generally divide the tribe into three divisions, named according to 
their habitat, — first, the Lower Chilcotin; second, the Stone Chilcotin, or Stonies; and, third, the Stick or Upper Chileotin. The first-named consist of 
three bands, originally emigrants from. Nacoontloon Lake and neighborhood. 
One of these, called the Anahem, live in a village on the north side of the 
Chilcotin Valley, about eight miles west of Hanceville, where they have 
reserves; the second band, called the Toozeys,! live really within the Shuswap 
territory, on Riskie Creek, not far from Fraser River; and the remaining 
band have located at Alexandria, within the Carrier territory. The Stone 
Chilcotin make their winter headquarters on a reserve on the south side of 
the Chilcotin Valley, about four miles west of Hanceville. The Stick 
Chilcotin live in small scattered communities around Chezikut Lake, Puntzee 
Lake, Anahem or Nacoontloon Lake, Tatla Lake, Chilco Lake, etc. Both 
they and the’ Stonies are much more nomadic than the Anahem and other 
bands, and roam during the greate; part of the year over their hunting- 
grounds to the west and south. The population of the whole tribe at the 
present day is probably about sso souls. The returns of the Indian 
Department for 1903 give the population of the whole tribe at the present day as about that number. Of these, the Anahem band has 223 souls; the 
Toozey band, 63; the Stony band, 108. The number of the Alexandria band 
is given as 65, of whom probably about 40 or less are Chilcotin, the 
remainder being Carrier, Shuswap, and persons of mixed parentage. It seems 
that the other bands of the tribe are not under any agency, but their number 
is probably about 100 or slightly over. According to white and Indian   
! Father Morice (see Notes on the Western Dénés, 23) gives Chilcotin names for some of the present. day bands. + See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, p. 23. * The names Anshem and Torey are said to be derived from names of Chileatin chiefs of bands. The former gives rise to several place-name; as Anshem Creek, Anahem Lake, Anabem Park, etc. Alesis Creek is also named afer a Chilcotin chief who was known to. the whites by that name.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 761 
testimony, the tribe at one time must have had nearly three times its present number. They were decimated by smallpox in 1862, and afterwards for 
many years gradually decreased. At present, most of the bands seem to be 
about holding their own. The Indian Department credits the Anahem band 
with an increase of five for the twelve months prior to their report, the 
Stony band is credited with an increase of two, and the Toozey band is 
stated to be stationary. Until about thirty-five or forty years ago, nearly two-thirds of the whole 
tribe lived in the valley which skirts the eastern flanks of the Coast Range 
from Chilco Lake north to near the bend of Salmon River. Most of them 
were located in the northern part of the valley, at Anahem or Nacoontloon 
Lake, just east of the territory of the Bella Coola, who at that time were a 
numerous tribe, and had settlements far up the Bella Coola River. Smaller 
bands had headquarters around Chilco and Tatla Lakes, and some families 
wintered along Chilco and Chilanco Rivers. Other people, probably belonging 
to a different sept, lived farther east, at Puntzce and Chezikut Lakes, some 
of them occasionally wintering in the Chilcotin Valley as far east as Alexis 
Creek. The band now called the Stonies scem to have wintered on the 
south side of the Chilcotin River at points considerably farther west than 
their present headquarters, many of them probably on the lower part of the 
Chilco River. The country from a little below Hanceville, or at least all of 
it cast of Big or Deer Creek, was looked upon strictly as Shuswap territory; 
and the Chilcotin never wintered within even a number of miles west of this 
line, for fear of attack by the Shuswap and other war-parties from the east 
or south. Sometimes a few of them wintered below the Chilcotin Cadon 
with their friends, the Cafion Division of the Shuswap, in whose houses they 
dwelt, and by whom they were protected. At this time, trading was carried 
on mostly with the Bella Coola, with whom the Chilcotin were generally on 
the best of terms. Their western frontier was the safest one to dwell on, 
for none of the coast tribes ever attacked them. The latter seldom ventured 
far from their homes on the seacoast or on the lower reaches of the rivers, 
and seem to have had a great awe of entering the forbidden and unknown 
fastnesses of the mountains. 
About 1865 several causes led to a gradual eastward movement of the 
tribe. The discovery of gold on Fraser River, and the subsequent settlement 
of the surrounding country by whites, opened up trading facilities and 
industrial opportunities hitherto not existing in this quarter. It also showed the Indians the possibilities of deriving an existence from agriculture. The 
practical extermination by small-pox of the Shuswap bands living west of Fraser River, and the removal of the few survivors to other places, left this 
fine tract of country practically unoccupied except as a Shuswap hunting- 
ground, and gave the Chilcotin a chance to settle in a country much superior

----

762 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
to- their own from every point of view. The introduction and enforcement 
of white man’s laws, recognizing no Indian tribal boundaries, reduced the 
dangers of such settlement to a minimum; also, after the Chilcotin trouble 
of 1864, the British Columbia ‘Government appears to have been anxious to 
induce the tribe to take up agriculture and settle in a part of the country 
where the influences of civilization were greater, and where they coyld be 
more easily watched and controlled. Accordingly one band, the Toozeys, 
were given a reserve on Riskie Creek, within Shuswap territory; and the 
main portion of the tribe were settled on the present Anahem reserve, west of Hanceville. Later a reserve was laid off for the Stony band, where they 
riow make their winter headquarters; and a small body that had encroached 
on Carrier territory settled in the Fraser Valley near Alexandria, where they 
could engage in agriculture under more favorable conditions. Thus, by 1870 
or thereabouts, Nacoontloon Lake had become practically deserted. About this time, or later, the Indians of Chezikut and Puntzee Lakes 
also became restless, and many of them settled in the main Chilcotin Valley, 
near the mouth of Alexis Creek, where they could farm to better advantage. 
Eventually they were turned away from this place by the Government; and 
I believe a reserve has now been laid out for them at Redstone Flats, much 
farther west, on one of the trails to Tatla Lake. Probably not over one- 
fifth of the tribe now live in their old habitat; and some of them have of 
late years occupied part of the old territory of the Bella Coola, spending a 
large part of their time in the upper Bella Coola Valley. Here they have 
small plots of potatoes and catch salmon, the high plateau of their own 
country being too cold for the successful cultivation of potatoes, which 
vegetable at the present day very few Indians care to be without. Since 
the Chilcotin have learned that white men’s laws allow the hunting of game 
in every place, and since the partial depletion of game in their own country, 
they have hunted extensively in Shuswap territory, just west of Fraser River, 
from Churn Creek down to Watson Bar Creek. This has engendered much 
ill fecling among the Shuswap and whites of that locality, as these inroads 
have had the effect of reducing the game to a very great extent. 
1 have failed to obtain from the Chilcotin any tradition of a migration 
of their people to the southeast or to the Nicola-Similkameen region, where a 
small tribe, rather closely related linguistically to the Chilcotin, formerly lived. 
Until forty years ago the Chilcotin had more frequent intercourse with 
the Bella Coola than any other tribe. They also had considerable intercourse 
with the Shuswap of Chilcotin Cafion, and with the nearest bands of Carrier 
inhabiting the country, from the Salmon River east to the sources of the Black- 
water. These people belong to the sept of the Lower Carrier called Nutca'tenne 
by Father Morice! The tribe also had some intercourse with the Comox   
Sec Notes on the Western Dénds, p. 35.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 763 
and Kwakiutl of the coast, and with the Lillooet. Intermarriage was rather 
frequent with the upper bands of the Bella Coola, and not infrequent with 
the above-mentioned Nutca'tenne, especially with those living at Klooshkis 
Lake and Elkatsho, the latter of whom were themselves much mixed with 
Bella Coola.! Intermarriage with the Bella Coola scems to have been fairly 
common in this region when Mackenzie passéd through in 1793. Also at 
one time many intermarriages took place with the Shuswap of the Cation, 
who, in 1855 are said to have been nearly half Chilcotin in blood. Inter. 
marriage with other tribes than those above mentioned appears to have been 
rather rare. A very few marriages with the Lillooet are on record, and 
women of that tribe have occasionally been held as slaves by Chilcotin to 
whom they bore children. Simon Fraser, in 1808, mentions sceing a 
Chilcotin, probably a slave, living among the Lillooet.” He says, “Here we 
became acquainted with a man of the Chilcotin tribe, who had left his own 
country when a boy, but still retained a little of the mother tongue” The 
Chileotin also had slave women occasionally from various coast peoples. and 
no doubt some of them would leave descendants in the tribe. 
At the present day there is hardly any intermarriage with other tribes. 
Some of the people settled at Alexandria have intermarried with Carrier of 
that place and with Shuswap, and there continue to be occasional marriages 
with the Klooshkis Lake people. The amount of mixture with whites has 
been very slight, and very few halfbreeds are met with. Before white 
women immigrated, the pioneer settlers of the Chilcotin region had wives mostly from the Shuswap and Lillooet tribes. There has been no inter- 
marriage with negroes and Chinese. 
The Chilcotin had a bad reputation at one time, and were noted as a 
rather turbulent and roguish people, inclined to take advantage of strangers, and hard to deal with. There is no doubt they were of a bolder and more 
restless disposition than the Carrier. Like the latter, they are very receptive, 
but until very lately were not considered so progressive, honest, cleanly, and 
industrious as the Shuswap. The Chilcotin language is most closely related 
to that of the Lower Carrier. 
MaxuraCTUREs. — Knives, spear-points, arrowheads, and adzes were 
made of stone chipped and flaked in the same manner as among the Carrier, 
Shuswap, and other tribes. The most common stones used were basalt and 
obsidian. Chert and glassy basalt, similar to the common arrowstone of the 
Shuswap, was procured from the neighborhood of Puntzee Lake; and dark 
gray and black obsidian were obtained from Anahem Peak and vicinity, 
northwest of Nacoontloon Lake, where it occurs in sifu as well as scattered 
  
* See Notes on the Western Dénés, p. a5. + See Voyages from Montreal, etc, p. 279. + See Journal of a Voyage, etc. p. 175.

----

764 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
around in bowlders. Adzes are hafted in the same way as among the 
Shuswap. Stakes in weirs are sometimes driven with stones lashed with withes 
to short wooden handles. Trees were felled with chiscls of caribou and elk antler driven with handhammers of stone, which resembled the common 
types found among the Shuswap and Thompson Indians. Another type of 
Chilcotin hammer-stone has been described by Father Morice.! Skin-scrapers 
of stone and bone, similar to those of the Shuswap, are used; and the whole 
process of tanning and dressing skins appears to be the same in both tribes. 
The Chilcotin use at their camps large cylindrical baskets of black-pine 
and spruce bark for soaking skins in. They are roughly stitched with wallup, 
and range from 80 cm. to 100 cm. in height, and about the same in diameter.* 
The beams or scraping-posts and 
frames used in dressing skins are 
the same as those found among the 
Shuswap, and the manner of wringing 
and smoking is also the same. 
After the skin is entirely freed of 
flesh and hair, it is soaked in water 
with soap or with birchleaves. 
Before stretching on the frame, four 
thin rods are inserted through slits 
in the edges of the skin, and the 
lashing is fastened to these instead 
of to the skin itself or to a cord, 
as is the usual method of the 
Thompson Indians. Dressed skins were frequently 
dyed with alder-bark, and are still so treated occasionally. Utensils were 
seldom painted.  Berry-juices and the fruit of Chenopodium capitatum were 
used as dyes and stains. Alder-bark was most commonly used as a dye, 
and wolfmoss (Everniz oulping) was also sometimes used. Quills and 
horsehair for ornamentation were frequently dyed. 
Basketry. — Great numbers of birch-bark vessels of superior workman- 
ship were made. All the types of baskets and trays in use among the Shuswap 
and Carrier? were in vogue, and most kinds are still made in considerable 
numbers. The rims of birch-bark baskets are often ornamented with stitches 
or wrappings of wallup, cherry-bark. and swan and goose quills cut open and 
flattened. Dyed horsehair and silk do not appear to be used for this 
purpose, as among the Shuswap. Pictographs and designs, such as the net, 
mountain, snake, and arrow-head patterns, are sometimes incised on the sides 
of baskets (Fig. 258). 
TV Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 13. * See p. 496. 3 See pp. 477 € seq., 496 et seq. 
  Fig. 258 (sis). Birch-Bark Basket, Height, 21.5 co. 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 765 
Baskets woven of spruce-root arg also made of the coiled type, similar 
in manufacture to those of the Shuswap and Lillooet, although inferior in 
regularity of stitch to the best workmanship of the latter tribe. This may 
be accounted for, perhaps, by the difference of material; the Lillooet using 
cedar-roots, which are straighter and split more evenly than spruce-roots. 
The Chilcotin woven baskets differ considerably in size. They are very 
much alike in shape, Most of them are somewhat rectangular in cross 
section, but so much rounded that no sharp edges are formed. Among the 
specimens here illustrated, only Figs. 260-262 have somewhat sharper edges. 
Almost all of them are a little higher on the short ends than in the middle 
of the wide ends, like some birch-bark baskets. The last coil is always 
finished off near one of the rounded corners, after having been carried along the short side. The only exception to this rule is shown in Fig. 262, in 
which the end is placed on the short side a little distance beyond where the 
last coil has turned the corner. The greater height of the ends seems to 
be due to the greater thickness of the coils at the short ends. The coiling 
is done very evenly, as was described in discussing the Shuswap baskets." All 
baskets are provided with a strengthening-hoop of willow, — in some cases of 
wire, — which is stitched on on the outside a little below the rim. A few 
baskets have two hoops instead of one. No baskets with flat coils of split 
sap-wood, like those of the Lillooet? are made. 
The method of ornamentation is the same as that applied by the 
Klickitat, Lower Thompson, and Lillooet. It is done essentially by imbri- 
cation, -the material used being grassstems and cherry-bark in their natural 
colors. It is worth remarking that the bottom of a few baskets shows the 
characteristic ornamentation of some coiled basketry of the Lillooet, grass 
being woven in under the stitches. This mode of ornamentation occurs, for instance, at the bottom of the baskets shown in Figs. 261, 263, 263, and 266. 
The arrangement of the ornamentation is quite characteristic of the 
Chileotin baskets. It has been pointed out before * that the Thompson River 
baskets are treated as a single ornamental field, while most of the Lillooet baskets have the ornamentation confined to the upper part of the basket. 
All Chilcotin baskets are divided into four fields, — an upper and a lower 
imbricated band, which run all round the basket under the hoop, and which 
are divided by a field the background of which is not imbricated, although 
it sometimes bears some designs in lighter color. Only in one specimen 
(Fig. 269) is this middle field also covered with imbrication in white grass. 
The hoop is sewed on over one or two coils, which are left without 
ornamentation; and the part of the basket above the hoop forms the fourth 
narrow band. 
  
+See p. 488. + See pp. 205, 206, of this volume. + See p. 206.

----

766 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
      
  
  
  
    
        
  
      
      
  
      
    
  
          
                
  
  
  
        
  
            
  
         
  
  
            
  z aa 
Tig. 25. Designs on Chilcotin Baskets. 
a, a, Snake or snake-fence. Probably the former significance of this design was snake or mountains; 4, Lakes and streams; ¢, Net; 4, Fishoribs; 6, Ribs; J; /% Ribs and backbones g, 8% ” Arrowheads; 4, Beaver; i, Meaning unkoown; J, Playingard. The former significance of this design was probably a stone; 4, Maker's mask, representing horse-brand; J, Not explained; m, Ducks; m, Beaver-tails; a, Unexplained; 4, Mountains or snakes; g, Sacks; 7, Unexplained; s, Lakes and streams; 4 Ribs of mammals; s, Ribs or fish; v, Beaver-ails; , Backbone of fish; x, Unexplained; 7, Unexplained; 7, Beaver-rails; aa, Stones; #, Mink; cs Tree.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 767 
The designs are nearly all geometric; and style, interpretation, and form 
differ considerably from those used by the Lillooet and Thompson. Fig. 259 
contains a series of the most characteristic designs. 
[The designs of the four bands are not necessarily related. In some 
cases, as in Figs. 264 and 269, the four fields show each a distinct pattern; 
while in others the first and third bands from below may be identical or 
symmetrical, as in Figs. 262 and 266. An examination of the designs shows 
clearly that the fundamental endeavor of the maker is to arrange the patterns 
in bands and to have the pattern in cach band occupy exactly the same 
number of coils. This accounts for the peculiar distortions that may be 
observed, for instance, in Fig. 260. Similar distortions occur in almost all 
the other specimens. A close examination of the baskets will show 
that the points of intersection of 
the diagonal lines and the apices 
and bases of triangles fall always 
on the same coils. It seems that in every case the making of the 
design is begun in the lower left- 
hand corner of one of the long 
sides, just under the point where the lowest coil terminates. 
In Fig 260 the method of 
work can be followed out in con- 
Fig. 260 (ify). Colle Taske. Clilotin, Height, siderable detail. After having com- a rene i ronrers pleted two coils imbricated in white, 
or snake-fence; top row, arrow-heads. the maker must have planned the 
lower ornamental band to be seventeen coils wide, and the distances of the 
first stitches were taken accordingly approximately at fifteen units. When 
the distance was not correctly taken, this necessitated irregularities in the 
diagonal lines or an addition of connecting dark stitches where the diagonals did not cross on the proper coil. On the corners these difficulties were 
considerably increased on account of the larger number of additional stitches 
required by the widening of the basket. The difficulties of adjustment that 
present themselves in the top row of the lowest band were overcome in the 
same manner. The middle band, the diagonal lines of which were carried 
up as continuations of the lines of the lowest band, ‘presented no difficulties. 
When the maker began the third ornamental band, she intended to continue 
her diagonal lines in the double zigzag band of the third row. She seems 
to have seen very soon that this led into difficulties on account of the short 
distances between the three diagonals on the middle of the long side, which 
on the opposite side of the basket were even nearer together than on the      
 

----

768 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
front; and for this reason it would seem that the attempt to correlate the _ 
zigrag bands of the third row with slanting lines of the middle band could 
not be carried out, and was given up; for this reason the designs on these 
two bands run quite independently. The irregularity of the distances between 
the diagonal lines of the middle band, and the necessity of keeping the top 
of the zigzag band on the same coil, necessitated the peculiar irregularities 
shown in Fig. 260. The attempt to adjust the design to the number of stitches and coils of 
the basket can also easily be traced in Fig. 261. After seven coils of plain 
white imbrication, the meandric pattern of the lowest band begins, and is 
carried around the basket fairly regularly until the place is nearly reached 
where the first ornamented coil ends. In the illustration this place is on the 
righthand side of the back of the 
basket, where the meandric bands 
become much more condensed. While 
on the faces of the basket there are 
two white stitches between the dark 
lines at the corners where the width 
of the basket increases, the number of 
these lines increases upwards from two 
to three. The middle band is entirely 
undecorated. The triangles on the 
third band are all one stitch apart until the end of the first coil is 
Highs on ee oom apart lowes. Teached, which is begun on the back 
tow, Sct; 20 row, mo design; 34 row, amowheads; of the basket on the right-hand side. 
top row, ducks. The triangles did not come out right, 
and, in order to adjust the band, the basal width of the last triangles is very 
much increased, their sides are flattened so as not to increase the number 
of coils occupied by them, and finally a space of eight white stitches is left 
between. Great irregularities also occur in the angles of the top row, which 
cannot be explained by technical considerations. 
The basket shown in Fig. 262 has the outer four rows of the bottom 
decorated with interwoven grass, as is common in Lillooet basketry. The 
three lowest rows on the sides are treated in the same way. The imbrication 
begins at the righthand front corner. In the first imbricated row every 
fourteenth stitch, and farther on every thirteenth stitch, is dark; while the 
others are white. These were evidently intended to begin the net design. 
When, however, the first coil was completed, it was found that the distance 
between the last dark point and the first one was not sufficient, Furthermore, 
the imbrication in the beginning is made with a very narrow strip of grass 
and bark, and does not completely cover the coil. Presumably for these     
    
  
  
   

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 769 
reasons the maker discarded the first stitch and closed her net design entirely 
independently in the next coil; so that in the basket as it appears at present 
a number of dark stitches at 
equal intervals appear quite 
independently of the net design. 
The fourth of these stitches 
coincides with the proper posi- 
tion of the lower corner of a 
net-mesh; and from there on, 
- the stitches are used in the 
net design. It will be noticed 
that the net design shows very 
strong distortion at the points 
of intersection where the maker 
did not succeed in bringing 
the intersections together prop- 
erly. The ‘arrow.point’ de- 
signs alternate in the lower 
row in the form of two triangles, 
one suspended from the other,     
  
    
¥ig. 262 (1s). Coiled Basket. Chilcotin. Height, 39 cm. Desigas (from bottom upward): lowest row, net design surmounted by armowhead design; 2d row, sacks; 3d row, armow-beads under Det design; top row, ibs (the straight lines ace called ribs of mammals; the zigeag lines, ishribe). 
and of two triangles, one standing on top of the other, while in the third band from below a number of triangles are found turned tip to tip and 
  
  forming hourglass shaped 
designs. There seems 
to be no regularity in 
their distribution. 
The design of the 
basket shown in Fig. 263 is very complicated. 
It would scem that here 
also the maker attempt- ed to Jay out the places for the minks and nets by dots placed in the lowest ornamented coil. 
Beginning with the first Fig. 265 (s}fy). Coiled Basket, Chilotn, Fight, 28 cm. Designs ornamental stitch in the (from bottom upward): lowest row, nets, and minks or fishers between the. nes, surmounted by a row of beavers represented by black stitches; 2d row, lower left-hand corner of 
beaveraral, beavers, and net; 34 row, sake fences top row citer amow. the illustration, we find heads or private mark of maker, this stitch immediately under the mink, fourteen stitches to the right another dark stitch, and eight 
stitches farther to the right again a dark stitch, each in the middle of a net-

----

770 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
mesh. Fourteen stitches farther to the right is again a dark stitch under 
the mink; but from this point on the regularity of the placing of these stitches is lost, and the general impression that the specimen conveys is, that 
the maker did not succeed in laying out the plan properly, but proceeded independently of the first stitches in the laying-out of the design when she once 
began to make the figures. The whole basket is surrounded by five minks 
alternating with five nets. In the top row the effort may be observed again 
to keep the zigzag lines exactly between the same coils. In the lowest coil 
of the top band appear also a number of dark stitches, apparently unrelated 
to the design, which give the impression that a mistake had also been made 
in laying out the general design. 
In the basket illustrated in Fig. 264 the ornamentation begins at the 
righthand back lower corner with two dark stitches, forming the basis of 
the zigzag line, and between 
twelve and fourteen stitches apart. 
After passing around the basket and reaching the righthand front 
corner, the maker evidently did 
not sec her way clear to fll this 
space regularly with two zigzags, 
and put in one zigzag line with 
broad flat head, which occupies 
the whole short side of the basket. 
Perhaps the attempt to make the 
short side appear symmetrical was Fig. 364 (rif: Coiled Basket. Chilotin. Height, 22 cm. Designs (from bottom upward): lowest row, mounams, 3 further inducement for using 
caske or smahefences 20. tow, beavers; 34 row, stones; this method of ornamentation. In Top row, rie or ferme. ; g consequence of this arrangement 
the single dark stitch which was introduced in the lowest coil came to be so 
near the first stitch, that in the next coil it could not be fitted into the 
design, and occupies now quite an irregular position. Attention may also 
be called to the single points at the apices of the zigzag line, which, wherever 
the top is flattened, retain their relative position and are not carried on as 
a continuation of the upper diagonal lines. A very peculiar feature of the 
basket is the irregularity in the middle band which is shown on the left- 
hand side, and which must be intentional, since it is carried out by imbrication. 
The bars in the top band begin regularly as twosstitch bars, while on the 
back three and two stitch bars alternate quite irregularly. 
In Fig. 265 attention may be called to the peculiar breaks in the line 
design at the upper part of the lower band. The illustration shows two of 
these breaks, while on the opposite side of the basket there is another break towards the righthand side. The break in the upper line, which will 
 

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 771 
be seen on the lefthand side of the illustration, is due to the overlapping 
of the. coils. 
The basket shown in 
Fig. 266 has a number of 
peculiarities, in that the zig- 
zag lines are not as strictly 
limited by the same coils as 
in all the other baskets. In 
the present specimen the 
design begins on the right. 
hand lower side on the back 
of the basket, and is carried 
around at regular intervals. 
The rigzag lines, instead of 
having distorted angles, are 
continued with considerable ® : 
regularity, and terminate Fig. 265 (sil). Coiled Basket, Chilcotin, Height, 30 em. 
accordingly at different levels. oie (0m im re om ns, the apex of the lowest being preicd by some people ss lakes and streams claimed by others to be 
four coils under the apex of enc with the lowest row. 
the highest triangle. Similar irregularities are repeated on the upper zigzag 
line, although they are not so marked there. The squares and crosses at 
the upper border of the 
lowest ornamental row 
alternate regularly on the 
back of the basket, while 
at the right-hand side of 
the illustration three black 
squares are followed by 
two crosses. The distances 
between these crosses and 
squares are fairly regular; 
but the maker has not 
made any attempt to cor- 
relate the zigzag line in 
Fig. 366 (lp). Cold Duke. Chileon, Megh 8 cn the middle unimbricated 
eet une part of the basket with 
tins Toe sale os roi poten, West designs, probably on of the Taske, contining the maker mark in the form of 8 rightangie,is account of the difficulty of shown in Fig. ari. making a regular zigzag 
line coincide with them. On the other hand, the squares in the upper border 
have been placed accurately over the apices of the zigzag line. The border 
    
  
   

----

772 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
over the rim shows also only a slight relation to the zigzag line under the 
rim. On the long side of the basket the net designs and the square design 
  are placed nearly, but 
_ not accurately, over the 
apices of the zigzag line. 
The basket bears on the 
middle of the back the 
maker's mark, which also 
re-appears on the upper 
border on the right-hand 
side quite near the place 
where the terminating 
coil is closed (sce Fig. 
271). 
In the basket shown 
in Fig. 267 the lack of 
correlation of the “cross” Fig. 267 (gifs). Coiled Basket. Chilcotin, Height, 31 cm. Designs . - y 
(tom bottom upward); lowest row, res sumone by beavers, sch repre. designs in the middle of sented by a diagonal cross; 2d tow, beaver-rails and beavers; 30 row, sacks fhe. over beavers; top row, same as Fig. 265. 
cated field above and below 
vertical lines on the middle 
line do not always coincide. 
It is difficult to assign a 
reason for this peculiar treat- 
ment. 
Quite a number of ir- 
regularities occur also in the 
middle part of Fig. 268. 
The lowest row of this basket 
has four net designs, and 
between them four checker 
designs representing beaver- 
tails. The lowest four rows 
of the grass ornamentation 
are made by weaving in 
long strips of grass, not by 
imbrication. The vertical 
lines in the middle strip are 
partly made in the same way, 
horizontal lines are all made unimbricated field 
and adjoining unimbri- 
is remarkable. On the back of the basket the 
unimbricated field above and below the middle 
  
  Fit 8 Gl) Coed Take, Chin, High, 32 cn " pwd): lowest Tow, nets and beaver tails; 2d awa ih nes emo, 3. got en od inks repesemed Ly dosble back crosses; 30 row, explained by some people a3 lakes and streams; (up row, Snexplaied,   
  not by true imbrication, although the continuous in this technique. On the middle strip double 
and single dark crosses alternate regularly around the basket. This design

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 773 
begins, like all the others, at the point shown on the left-hand side of Fig. 
268. After having carried the design around the basket, the maker found 
the distance from the last double cross to the beginning of the design too 
long, and therefore inserted two single crosses. The oblong designs in the 
third row show also considerable irregularity. The distances between the 
three bars in the upper border are long on the long sides of the basket, 
short on the short sides. 
  
  
      
  
    
  
      
    
Fig 369 Gif) Cold puke Cilodn, Tight, 23 cm. Designs (fom botom pwd: lowes rom, Fibs or fh, represented by straight horizontal lines; between the ribs, beaver-ails; the single design on the short nd sated by some to. be backbone of 8 Fab; 20 ow rib; 38 row knowns top row, the sme as i Fi: 265. 
Fig. 269 differs from all the other baskets in having the whole middle 
decorative field imbricated. The lowest border does not show a regular 
alternation of the bar and checker design, but has on one short side the 
arrangement shown in the illustration ; while on the opposite side there are two 
bar designs and a design consisting of a central double line with spurs on 
cach side, which also 
occurs on the opposite 
short side. The lengths 
of the single elements 
of the band design in 
the third field from the 
bottom of this basket : ; 
are quite irregular. op a, ny, ide my ics ee wih whee Fig. 270 represents sms 4 Design on loves band, sskemck; on snimbricated band, ib 0 beaker Vin, dig ovr th hoop, probly makers mak. 
Teit saw among the Indians at Chizikut Lake. Both differ in style from all 
the other baskets, — the former in not having the narrow ornamental band 
over the hoop; the other in having only one imbricated band under the 
hoop, the middle unimbricated band reaching right up to the hoop. — EprTor. 
It is said that the designs on basketry of the Chilo Lake band are, or 
 

----

774 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
were until very recently, all realistic, and not geometric, most of them being 
representations of animals. The only basket 1 ever saw from there was of 
the ordinary Chilcotin type, with pictures of horses and dogs all around it. 
Another basket 1 saw at the mouth of the Chilco was covered entirely with 
a design exactly like that of Fig. 4, Plate XXII, in Vol. I of this series, 
and is the only one of its kind I ever saw in the tribe. The Indians did not know where it had been made. It had changed hands several times, 
but 1 think it must have been of Salish manufacture. 
There is not as great a variety of design in Chilcotin basketry as is to 
be found in that of the Lillooet or Thompson. The people who make most 
of the woven basketry were the Stonies and the Chezikut Lake band. The 
Nacoontloon Lake and other bands made hardly any, and this holds good 
at the present day; for the Anahem, Toozey, and Alexandria bands, most of 
whom came originally from Nacoontloon Lake, make very little basketry. 
The chief basket-makers are the Stony band, with headquarters at the Stony 
Reserve; the Chezikut band, now mostly located at the Redstone Flats; and 
some families around Chilo Lake. Many basket- 
weavers have private marks on their baskets; in 
several cases these arc copies of the horse-brands of 
their husbands (Fig. 271; see also Fig, 270, 4). 
r Mats, generally of small size, are made by the 
Chilcotin, although it is said that they were never 
used so extensively as among the Shuswap. They 
were made of elaagnusbark or of rushes, and on rare occasions of cedar- 
bark. Tent-mats were not made. The manner of weaving was the same as 
that used by the Thompson Indians! According to Father Morice, the 
Carrier and Sekanai did not make mats.” 
Bags made of animal skins dressed in the hair were very common; and 
woven bags made by twining, like those shown in Fig. 131, # (p. 18), and 
Figs. 149, 150 (p. 202), of Vol. I, were also plentiful. The latter were made 
of rushes, elwagnus-bark, bark twine, sinew thread, and spun goat's-wool. 
The weaving in the goat's-wool bags is much closer than that of the others. 
Some bags had the warp and woof of different materials, such as bark thread 
and wool thread, and bark and sinew. Some bags were woven of rushes 
in checker weaving. A specimen in the Museum (gi%;) seems to have been 
made in the following way. The woofstrands were bent over in the middle 
and hung over a batten. Over each warpstrand the end of a woofstrand 
was tied in next to the batten by twining first on one side, then on the 
other; and then woof and warp were interwoven as diagonal checker-work.   
Fig. 271 (si) Maker's Mark. 
  
+ See Val. 1 of this series, Fig. 131, ¢ and 7 (p. 189), and Fig. 133 (p. 191). # See Notes on the Western Dénés, p. 157.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 775 
The width "of the bag decreases somewhat towards the opening. The loose 
ends of the warp and woof, about three inches from the opening of the bag, 
were turned down and held together by twining. The mouth of the bag is 
formed by a strip of skin, which is sewed on to the twined portion. The 
bottom is strengthened by sewing a piece of skin or cloth on the outer side. 
Ornamentation of bags at the present day is generally done by working 
in colored yarn bought from the whites; but formerly strands of varying 
natural tints, or others dyed with berries, were used in bark bags, as in 
Figs. 149, 150, of Vol. I. Threads of goat's-wool dyed were wrought in for 
ornament in wool bags, or strands of the same were introduced in bark bags 
in the same manner as bought yarn is used now. 
One woollen bag (51%) is made in very close twining. The background 
is white, on which a band ornamentation in black, red, and yellow is applied. 
The unornamented bands are made in two-ply twining over single threads, 
while the ornamented bands are made in twilled two-ply twining, in which two 
strands of the warp are used in the twilling. 
Vertical-bar patterns are made in this way by twining 
the same colors around the same pairs of warp. 
strands. Diagonal lines are made by alternating 
the pairs of warp-strands which are twined together. 
Zigng lines are made by using in the upper half 
of the pattern the diagonal mode of twining just 
described, while in the lower half the same pairs of 
warp-strands are twined together in such a way that 
the successive lines form a checker-work of colors. 
Thread and twine were made from fibre of nettle, eleagnus-bark, and 
sinew taken from the backs of animals, such as the caribou, elk, and deer. 
Hemp-bark was obtained occasionally from the Shuswap and Lillooet. 
Awls were generally made from the fibula of the bear, caribou, and 
deer. Blankets of goat's-wool were woven probably in the manner described 
by Father Morice;' and other blankets, woven of twisted strips of rabbit- 
skins and of lynxskins? are still made and used a good deal. Belts and 
tump lines of yarn are made. Nets for fishing-purposes were made of bark twine of varying thickness, the size of mesh being regulated with a mesh- 
stick (Fig. 272). 
Houses AND Furwisuines. — The winter dwellings of many families, 
especially in the eastern part of the country, were underground houses, built 
exactly like those. of the Shuswap. They were seldom of very large size, 
and some of them were made very .small to accommodate single families only. It seems, however, that the majority of the tribe never adopted the 
  Fig. 272 (sis) Mesh Stick. Length, 7 cm. 
  
Notes on the Western Dénés, pp. 16 and 157. 3 See Vol. I of this series, Fig. 131, £, p- 189.

----

776 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
underground house, but lived in square and oblong lodges made of logs or 
poles, and roofed with bark or brush. Most of these were earth-covered, 
excepting the gables, which were generally filled in with bark and brush. 
Mats were sometimes used as dust-coverings, although old skins were perhaps 
more common. In the summertime, bark lodges similar to those of the 
Shuswap were used by some families; but perhaps the majority of the people, 
in the fair season and when on hunting-trips, were content with simple 
shelters of bark or brush, open on one side. It appears that conical lodges 
were not made, nor were mats and skins used as lodge coverings. It is 
said that some of the people around Nacoontloon Lake or northwest of there 
had adopted a plank house with bark roof, after the style of those used by 
some of the Carrier! At the present day the tribe lives in log-cabins roofed 
with shakes, bark, or earth; and in the summer or when travelling they use 
tents of cotton drilling. However, some of the Stone and Stick Chilcotin 
use shelters only, as in the olden time. Caches under ground .and on 
scaffolds were similar to those of the Shuswap. Sometimes they were made 
on trees, or of logs 
built on the ground. 
Sweat-houses were of 
the same type as 
those of the Shuswap. The  Chilcotin, how- 
ever, never sweat: 
bathed to the same ex- 
tent as the Shuswap. 
Household utensils included birch-bark and woven baskets used for the 
same purposes as among other adjoining tribes. No circular baskets were 
used for boiling food in, as among the Shuswap, Thompson Indians, and 
Lillooet. Oblong and “nut’-shaped baskets with lids were not made or used. 
In the extreme western part of the country, small wooden boxes, probably 
procured from the Bella Coola, were sometimes used. Bags and wallets of 
skin and woven material, already described, were much in use. The larger 
bags were almost invariably of skin. It seems that many kinds of bags found 
among the Shuswap were unknown to the Chilcotin, such as those shown in 
Figs. 149, 150, and 151, pp. 202, 203, of Vol. I. Floors of lodges were 
strewn with the small ends of fir and balsam branches, and occasionally with 
grass or rushes. Mats were used for eating from, and bedding consisted 
entirely of skins and robes. 
Mortars were not made or used. Cups were made of birch-bark. Trays 
for holding fish were generally made of birch-bark; but wooden ones, like 
  Fig. 273 Grif). Hom Spoon. Length, 46 cm. 
  
+ See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Chap. XI.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 777 
those of the Bella Coola, were occasionally used in the western part of the 
country. Spoons were mostly of mountainsheep horn (Fig. 273). Some 
were very large and oval, with short handles; and others, smaller and round, 
with longer handles. Some wooden spoons were also used. 
CLoTriNG AND ORNAMENTS. — The most common dress of the Chilcotin 
men consisted of moccasins, long leggings, breech-cloth, belt, robe, and cap. 
Shirts were seldom worn except by women. The common dress of the 
latter consisted of moccasins, short leggings, kilt, robe, and headband or 
cap. Younger and wealthy women often substituted a long buckskin shirt 
for the kilt. Caps and headbands worn by men were made of various 
animal skins dressed in the hair. Some caps had the animal's ears and 
sometimes the tail attached. Head-bands were not ornamented lavishly with 
feathers, as among the Shuswap and Thompson. Cedar-bark head bands 
were sometimes used in dances. Caps and headbands of women were 
generally made of caribouskin. Leggings were of dressed caribou and 
buckskin, sometimes dyed red and fringed. Moccasins were also of dressed 
caribou and buckskins, made in two styles without trailers. One kind had 
cross-cut toe and a tongue-piece, generally square. The other style was like 
Fig. 170, p. 210, of Vol. I. In the wintertime, double moccasins were 
often used, the inside ones of softened caribou or other skin worn hair- 
side in. 
Trousers, or combined trousers and breech-cloths, were sometimes used. 
Breech-cloths consisted of a rather wide piece of dressed caribou or buckskin 
cut short, and without fringes. Some were made of skins dressed with or 
without the hair. Kilts were generally made of dressed caribou-skin fringed, 
or of marmot-skin and various furs. Capes and ponchos of cedar-bark were 
used by a few people in the western part of the country, probably in wet 
weather only. Robes were in universal use, and worn by both sexes, from 
the youngest to the oldest. The most common kinds were of marmot-skins 
sewed together, and of woven rabbitskins. Woven lynx-skin robes were also 
common, and woven goat'shair blankets like those of the Lillooet were in 
use. Dressed beaverskins sewed together were also much used before the 
advent of the white furtraders. It seems that coats, jackets, and vests or 
halfshirts, of skin, were seldom or never worn. Clothing was not painted, 
and was seldom ornamented to any great extent. Moccasins and leggings 
were occasionally embroidered with quills; and tassels of dyed goat's-wool 
were sometimes attached to belts, leggings, and women's shirts. Women's 
caps and head-bands were frequently embroidered with dentalia. 
Earornaments of dentalia were much used, and generally attached to 
holes bored around the helix, as illustrated by Father Morice! Nose: 
  
+ Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 156.

----

778 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
ornaments of dentalia, with tufts of the red-headed woodpecker's scalp, were 
similar to those used by the Shuswap and Carrier.) Nose-rods and nose-rings 
of copper were also used by some. Abelone-shells procured from the coast 
were occasionally used as ear-ornaments and as pendants to necklaces. The 
latter were made of dentalium-shells strung on thongs, and were much in use. 
Some men wore necklaces of grisly-bear claws, beaver-claws, and wolf's teeth. 
In later days, colored glass beads were much used. Labrets were unknown. 
Combs were cut out of a single piece of birch-wood or juniper-wood, and 
sometimes had incised patterns on them (Fig. 274). Tweezers were made 
of two pieces of caribou-antler tied at one end with 
sinew, or of copper in a single piece. No doubt 
they were similar to those used by the Carrier® and 
Shuswap. 
Women generally dressed their hair in two 
braids, the ends of which they tied at the back. 
Young people wore their hair loose or tied in a 
knot at the ear. Some people cut their hair across the brow, and many men cut theirs across the neck. 
There seems to have been less attention paid to the 
hair, and there were fewer styles of dressing it, than 
among the Shuswap and Thompson Indians. At 
the present day most Chilcotin take much less care 
of the hair than the Carrier and Shuswap, and many 
of the Stonics seem but seldom even to wash their 
faces. There seems also to have been less variety 
in facepainting than among the Shuswap and 
Thompson tribe. Red paint was that most used, 
and was obtained from the Shuswap and Bella Coola. 
Fig 274 cba). Comt, ron and Tattooing was very common, especially among back views Width, 75 mm females, and was done with charcoal at the age of puberty. 1 failed to obtain any explanation of several designs of face- 
tattooing that I observed among the tribe. One man had a pair of horizontal 
lines tattooed close to each corner of the mouth. Another one had a line 
running from one ear over the bridge of the nose to the other ear, and also 
two divergent lines running from the under lip over the chin, beginning 
approximately at the canine teeth. A third man had two parallel horizontal 
lines close together on each cheekbone. A woman had a cross like a 
multiplication-sign_on each cheek-bone, and three almost parallel lines close 
together running ‘downward and outward from each corner of the mouth. 
Another one had two crosses like. multiplication-signs on cach cheek-bone, —     
    
  
1 See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 160. © Ibid, Figs. 124 and 125.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP, 779 
one just in front of the ear; the other a little farther forward, towards the 
nose. A more complicated design used by a woman consisted of three 
vertical lines close together rising on the forehead over the nose. Two sets 
of three lines ran down over the cheeks from under the eyes towards the 
angles of the lower jaw, ending in about the middle of the cheek. A set 
of three slightly divergent lines ran outward from each corner of the mouth, 
and three parallel lines close together ran down the chin from the under lip. 
Another woman had a design similar to the one just described. There were 
the same three lines on the forehead. In addition to these, there were two 
short horizontal lines close together across the nose from eye to eye, which 
were continued from the outer corners of the eyes horizontally over the 
temples towards the ears. At each corner of the mouth there were two sets, 
each consisting of three nearly parallel lines, one set rising from the mouth 
towards the ear, the other one sloping outward and downward. Both sets 
were rather short. A pair of divergent lines ran down from under the lower 
lip at the point of the canine teeth over the chin. One woman had a simple 
horizontal line across the chin. Another one had a set of seven lines 
distributed over the chin from one corner of the mouth to the other, all 
beginning at the lower lip. The same woman had four bands tattooed over 
the back of her wrist. Her face was painted red, the whole cheek to a 
point near the nose being daubed over with ochre, the eyebrows and the 
strip connecting the two eyebrows being painted in the same way. 
Sussistexce. — The main food-supply of the Chilcotin consisted of fish, 
game, roots, and berries, as among other tribes. Some salmon were caught 
and cured by them, but the bulk of their supply was procured from the 
Bella Coola and the Shuswap. Bag-nets were not much used in olden times, 
but at the present day are extensively in use along the main Chilcotin River. 
They are of the same kind as those of the Shuswap. Weirs and traps are 
employed for catching salmon about the mouth of the Chilco River. Trout 
and small fish were caught in great numbers with large nets and traps set 
in the streams and lakes. Nearly all the kinds of fish-traps used by the 
Carrier and Shuswap were also utilized by the Chilcotin. Fish-spears were not used so much as among the Lillooet and some other tribes. They had 
two or three prongs, like those commonly used by the Shuswap! It seems 
that single-pronged spears were not used. The tips of fish-spears were made 
of bone, antler, or copper. Fish-hooks were like those of the Carrier? and 
Shuswap. When fishing through holes in the ice, small decoys in the form 
of fish-fry, made of bone or caribou-antler, were used, as among those tribes. 
A Chilcotin specimen in the collections of the Museum is very rudely carved,    
  
© See Vol. 1 of this series, Figs. 231, 232, pp. 251, 252. 2 See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénds, Figs. 59, 60.

----

780 | TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
with a slight notch indicating the mouth of the fish, and a flattened tail with 
a notch. There is a slit in the back; and apparently the decoy was tied to 
the fishline, being wound around with sinew or thread passing through this 
notch. The principal method of catching fish at the present day is by 
trapping. 
Roots are dug and cooked in the same manner as among the Shuswap. 
They do not form as large a part of the food-supply as among the Thompson 
Indians, for instance; nor are edible roots found in such variety as in the 
country of the latter tribe. Rootdiggers are made of service-berry wood and 
of caribou-antler (see Fig. 234, p. 513). No rootdigger handles of mountain- 
  Fig. 475, a0’ rie) # (rhiah < (ribo) SapSerupers. oy 4, back views § mat sie, 
sheep horn were used, ‘Woven baskets were most employed for gathering 
roots, and birch-bark baskets for berrying. The roots of the following plants 
were used as food: Claytonia sp., hog-fennel (Peucedanum macrocarpum), 
Lilium Columbianum, wild onion (Allium sp.), Erythronium grandifiorum, 
Indian rice (Fritillaria lanceolata), fernroot. Several other kinds are also 
used, but I had no chance to identify them. The principal fruits gathered 
were service-berries and soap-berries, both of which were cured in the same 
manner as among the Shuswap. Large quantities of these berries were dried 
in cakes and sold to the Bella Coola. Frames for drying berries, similar to 
that shown in Fig. 215, p. 235, of Vol. I of this series, were sometimes 
used. Bark trays (see Fig. 206, p. 482) were used for collecting soap-berries, 
the branch being shaken above them. Most other berries indigenous to the 
country were eaten, such as two or three kinds of cranberries, two or three 
varieties of blueberries, raspberries, strawberries, black currants, wild cherries,

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 781 
bear-berries, and also the fruit of Chenopodium macrocarpum. The growing 
shoots of the cow-parsnip and the fireweed or willow-herb are peeled and 
eaten as among the Shuswap. The cambium layer of the black pire is 
much relished. ~Sap-scrapers used for gathering it were made of caribou 
antler, and were usually double-ended (Fig. 275). Many of them were 
ornamented with incised lines, circles, etc. Bark-peelers of caribou-antler 
were also used (see Fig. 235, a, 4, p. 516). Black moss was also utilized 
as food.! 
= [ 
| 
k 
         
© TTT 
<= 
E 
LS ¢ Fig. 276. Amows. @ (sits). # (sHy), Rabbivarrows; ¢ (ghfy), Squieelarrow; (sit), Birdarrow. E Total lengths, 64 cm. 61 cm, 56 cm. 59 cm. 
  The Chilcotin were great hunters and trappers, and the Stone and Stick 
Chilcotin still continue to depend largely on hunting and trapping for a 
living. Large game was very plentiful formerly, and wild fowl were numerous 
in most of the lakes. Anahem and Chezikut Lakes especially, still teem 
with ducks and geese in the fall, and swans and pelicans are not uncommon. 
  
+ An account of some of the roots, etc, used by the Chilcotin, and the tribal names for the lunar months, are given by Father Morice in his Notes on the Western Dénés, pp. 106, 116.

----

782 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Grouse of seven or more varieties were plentiful. The Stick Chilcotin hunt 
caribou, marmots, goats, and bears; the Stone Chilcotin hunt deer, sheep, 
marmots, and goats; while the rest of the tribe hunt principally deer. 
Occasionally some of the Anahem band go northwest in the fall, and hunt 
caribou in the Itcha Range and in the Caribou Hills. As among the Carrier, 
the meat of rabbits formed a not unimportant part of the food-supply of 
most bands. Bows were made of juniper-wood, and were strung with sinew. They 
were of the same length as the “flat bows’ of the Shuswap, and similar in 
shape: and all the best ones had sinew glued on the back to a considerable 
thickness. Some practice-bows and boys’ bows had strings of twisted caribou 
hide instead of sinew. 
Arrows were generally somewhat shorter than those of the Shuswap, and 
were made of service-berry wood tipped with stone and antler. They were 
winged with duck, goose, and grouse feathers. Practice-arrows were merely 
sharpened at the point. Rabbitarrows (Fig. 276, a, 4) had antler tips. 
The one represented in a has a barbed point, which is attached to the 
shaft by means of a wrapping of sinew. The line by means of which the 
detachable point is connected with the shaft passes under this wrapping with 
sufficient friction to allow the point to be held in place when the line is 
drawn taut. After striking, the point comes off, and the line slips through 
the wrapping to near its end, where it is held by a knot. The tip of the 
shaft in which the barbed point is inserted has a deep groove, the open 
side of which is closed by a flattened quill, the whole being firmly wrapped 
with sinew. Squirrelarrows (Fig. 276, ¢) had square, notched heads; and 
birdarrows (Fig. 276, d), thick, rounded, blunt points. Some wararrows 
had detachable antler tips,! probably like those mentioned by Father Morice 
as in use among the Carrier. Arrows were not poisoned. Bows and arrows 
were often entirely stained red with berryjuices. No arrows with detachable 
foreshafts were used. Quivers’ were made of the skins of various animals, 
including the dog, fawn, fisher, and wolverene. 
Dogs were used in hunting, some of them being specially trained for 
bear, beaver, deer, and other animals. Probably all the kinds of traps 
employed by the Carrier were also used by the Chilcotin. Snaring of rabbits 
and muskrats was a woman's occupation, the men giving attention to the 
capture of larger animals, such as the beaver, otter, marten, and bear. Two 
or three kinds of rabbitsnares were used. 
Traver, axp Traps. — The canoes used by the Chilcotin were formerly 
of bark, most of them probably the same in type as those of the Carrier.” 
It seems, however, that two or three styles were “und, one of them 
    
+ See Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Fig. 27. * Ibid. p 11g.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 783 
approximating to the “sturgeon-nose’ canoe used by the Shuswap. Canoes 
roughly dug out of balsam-poplar trees’ were made use of; and after the 
introduction of steel axes, these and log rafts entirely displaced the old types 
of bark canoes. 
The Chilcotin frequently bridged streams of considerable size with con- 
structions on the cantilever principle. As among other tribes, goods were 
transported on the back with tump-lines. Most of these were made of dressed 
skin, but some were woven of goat-wool and bark thread, and others of 
elzagnus-bark (Fig. 277). 
Dogs were used for packing, as among the Shuswap and Carrier, and 
were also employed in the wintertime for drawing sleds. The latter were 
practically the same as those still used by the Carrier. Snowshoes were 
much used, and were of two or three types, similar to those of the Carrier? 
The ground sticks were generally of mountain-maple wood; and the fillings, 
of caribou babiche. Webbed walking-sticks like those of the Carrier ® and 
Shuswap were also used 
in the wintertime. 
Horses were intro- 
duced at a much later 
date than among the 
Shuswap, and probably 
not before 1870 had 
they ‘become common. Fig. a (if). Tumpline, Width of middle pics, 5 mm. At the present day the . 
eastern bands of the Chilcotin are well supplied with horses, and the Anahem Indians do much teaming for the whites. Trade was carried on chiefly with the Bella Coola and the Cafion division of the Shuswap. From the former the tribe procured principally dried salmon, salmon and olachen oil, dentalium and abelone shells, paint, some copper, a few goatwool blankets, a little cedar-bark, and occasionally cedar-wood boxes and dishes. In later days they also received some iron and iron tools. In exchange they gave cakes of service-berries, cakes of soap-berries, snow- shoes, dressed caribou and deer skins, goatskins, and furs. From the Shuswap the tribe obtained dried salmon, said to be superior to that procured from the Bella Coola, salmon-oil, red paint, deer and elk skins, some bark thread, and in later days tobacco and horses; also part of the Chilcotin supply of copper and iron seems to have been obtained from the Shuswap. They gave the latter in return dentalium-shells, goat'swool blankets, woven rabbit and lynx skin blankets, dressed caribouskin, raw marmot-skins. With 
    
1 See Morice, Notes on the Western Déns, Fig. 103. * oid, Figs, 141, 142. + Ibid, Fig. 144.

----

784 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
the Carrier and Lillooet the tribe seems to have traded very little. They had four routes to the coast south of Bella Coola, leading to Knight Inlet, Bute Inlet, Toba Inlet, and Jervis Inlet respectively. The last of these, however, was seldom used; and, on the whole, comparatively little trading 
was carried on with the tribes occupying these inlets, who seem to have been suspicious of the Chilcotin, whom they considered guilty of sometimes murdering their hunters and stealing women. 
The Chilcotin appear to have procured their first articles of white man’s 
manufacture from the Bella Coola, in the latter part of the eighteenth 
century. After the establishment of trading-posts in the Carrier country in 
the carly part of the nineteenth century, they procured many things through 
the Carrier, and at a somewhat later date also through the Shuswap. About 
the middle of the last century they had a sub-trading post of the Hudson 
Bay Company in their midst for several years. It was located on the north 
bank of the Chilcotin River, a little above the mouth of the Chilco. 
Warkare. — In warfare large expeditions appear to have been the 
exception. To judge from tradition, most wars were waged with the Carrier 
of Fraser and Nechaco Rivers; and in these fights the Chilcotin claim that 
they generally were victorious, although the enemy sometimes retaliated with , varying success. There are traditions of the Chilcotin attacking the Carrier of Alexandria twice; and Father Morice mentions their war of about 1743, when they practically exterminated the inhabitants of the Carrier village of 
Chinlac at the mouth of Stuart River. There is also a tradition of their attacking and burning a village of the Coast Indians on one of the inlets south of Bella Coola, when they killed many people and took a large number of slaves. 
It seems that the tribe never fought with the Bella Coola, and their fighting with the Lillooet and Shuswap consisted principally of affrays between hunting parties. The Carrier of Fraser and Nechaco Rivers, the Shuswap, and on one occasion the Lillooet, appear to have been the only tribes who ever attacked the Chilcotin. The Coast Indians never did. About 1748 a large number of Chilcotin were killed by the Carrier in revenge for the Chinlac massacre.! 
On a little flat below a cliff on the north side of the Chilcotin River, a little east of the mouth of the Chilco, may be seen a number of bowlders, which, according to tradition, are the transformed bodies of Alexandria 
warriors who strayed over the cliff in the dark while on the way to attack 
a camp of Chilcotin who lived in the vicinity. 
In 1864 trouble started with the whites, some members of the tribe having an idea that the latter had purposely sent the small-pox among them   
  
+ See Morice, History of the Northern Toterior of Britsh Columbia, pp. 1519.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 785 
to kill them off However, this in itself would probably not have led to 
hostilities, which, in reality, were precipitated by a party of white men 
engaged in making a road at the head of Bute Inlet, intended to be continued 
across the Chilcotin plateau to Alexandria. According to report, some of 
the men commenced to bother the women of a party of Chilcotin who were 
camped near there at the time, and their cook is said to have thrown some 
boiling water on a boy who had gotten into the habit of hanging around 
the camp. The following night the Chilcotin attacked the camp, killing 
fourteen out of the seventeen men; while the others, although wounded, 
managed to escape. After this they captured a pack-train which crossed their country; killed all the men except one, and committed other depredations. 
The Government sent a military expedition to punish them, which, after 
losing one of their scouts and being unable 
to inflict any punishment on the Indians, at 
last enticed a small band of them to lay 
down their arms under a promise of pardon, 
which promise they at once disregarded and 
hung five of them to satisfy justice. 
In war, besides bows and arrows and 
daggers, the Chilcotin used spears with stone 
and antler points, and clubs with stone heads, 
like those of the Shuswap. In later days, 
arrow and spear heads and knives were made 
of iron. Cuirasses of wood, and thick elk- 
hide shirts, were worn by some warriors. I 
did not hear of any forts or fortified camps. ri. 27 (to) KoweCors fr Gane being in use. Lona. Width, 6 cm. 
Games AND Pastimes. — Like all the neighboring Indian tribes, the 
Chilcotin were fond of gambling, and had various games of chance, some of 
which they are still fond of playing. One of their favorite games was leha'l, 
which they played in the same way as the Shuswap. The, bones used were generally larger than among the latter. Knuckle-covers (Fig. 278) similar to 
those of the Shuswap were word in playing the game. Some of these had 
beaver-claws attached to make a rattling noise. It is said that parties of Chilcotin have been known to become so engrossed and fascinated with this 
game, that they have left a dead relative unburied for several days while 
they engaged in it. Other games in vogue were the gambling-stick game 
and the beaver-tooth dice game. 
Signs were left at camps and on trails similar to those used by the 
    
+ See Morice, History of the Northern I + See Vol. 1 of this series, pp. 272, 273. 
  of British Columbia, pp. 307-313.

----

786 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
Carrier and Shuswap; but I did not hear of any sign language, although 
it seems likely that a certain number of signs have been or may even yet 
be in use. 
SociAL ORGANIZATION. — From the assertion of the Shuswap, and from 
what little information 1 managed to gather from the Chilcotin themselves, 
it appears certain that the tribe was organized in a manner similar to that of 
the Coast tribes. They seem to have had three classes, — nobles, common 
people, and slaves. A clan system also prevailed, and there are traces of 
numerous socicties. These aré probably the same as the honorific totems spoken of by Father Morice as occurring among the Carrier, or similar to 
them. It seems that the child belonged to both the father's and the mother's 
families. The societies and groups of the Shuswap, which have been described 
before,! were quite similar to the corresponding groups among the Chilcotin from 
which tribe these customs were borrowed. It seems probable that part, at 
least, of the organization of the Chilcotin, was not borrowed directly from 
the coast, but rather from the Carrier, who obtained it from the Tsimshian 
tribes of Skeena River. 
The Raven scems to have been a strong clan among the Chilcotin. 
Nobles took their rank according to the amount of wealth they were able 
to distribute at potlatches. If one man gave a greater potlatch than another, 
he ranked higher, and the same seems to have been true of clans. As 
among the western Shuswap, the clans gave no explanation of their origin 
in traditions, and thus there are no clan traditions in Chilcotin mythology. 
Father Morice states the same to be true of the Carrier clans, and further says 
that the system had not been borrowed in its entirety by all the Carrier at 
the time of the arrival of the first whites! This agrees with the statements 
of the Shuswap regarding the comparatively recent introduction of the system 
among them 
It seems that some bands of the tribe had hereditary chiefs, and others 
had none. : 
It is said that the Chileotin did not smoke at one time; but, at least as early as the beginning of the last century, some of them had adopted 
the custom from the Shuswap, from whom they sometimes procured wild 
tobacco and pipes. They also procured pipestone themselves from the banks 
of the Chileotin River below Hanceville, and fashioned therefrom pipes ® like 
those of the Shuswap. Some of them were ornamented with incised patterns. 
One of these in the collections of the Museum is similar to the one shown 
in Fig. 306, Vol. I of this series, except that the bowl has more nearly the 
form of a Dutch clay pipe. Along the rim and down the middle line in the 
    
! See pp. 575 ot seq + Sec Morice, Carrer Sociology, p. 119. » Sce also Morice, Notes on the Western Dénés, Figs. 1, 2

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 787 
front and back of the bowl is a chevron design representing ribs (the same 
as the chevron design in Fig. 308, 4, of Vol. I). The stem end of the pipe 
is provided with a simple brass ferrule. At the present day smoking is 
indulged in a good deal by both sexes, wooden pipes bought at stores being 
used, and white man’s tobacco, which is generally used without kinnikinnik. 
Drums and rattles were formerly used at dances. 
Carved posts from six to twelve feet in height were erected in front 
of some of the houses at the old Nacoontloon village, and in a few other 
places. They were carved to represent human and animal figures, and very 
likely were totem-poles or representations of the clan totem. 
Crmpsoon, Puserty, Deati. — The Chilcotin cradle was, and is still, 
made of willow-wands or sapling firs woven with sprucerroot into a form 
somewhat resembling the common birch-bark carriers of the Shuswap. The 
  Fig. 379 (sir). Cradle. Length, 63 cm. 
whole framework was covered on the outside with dressed caribou or buck- 
skin, sometimes dyed red. Canvas. or cloth is often used instead at the 
present day. The cradle is provided with a hoop like that of the Shuswap 
baby-carrier, on which designs are sometimes incised, burned, or painted. A 
removable frame, made of sticks tied together, a piece of bark, or a board, is placed in the bottom of the cradle. Most cradles are also provided with 
birch-bark conduits to run off moisture from the infant. . These conduits are 
generally closely stitched with spruce-root at the end to be placed next the 
child, in the manner of rims of birch-bark baskets. Tin conduits are sometimes 
used at the present day. Birch-bark carriers like those of the Shuswap were 
used by a very few of the Chilcotin. The head part of the cradle terminates 
in a point. : 
Both boys and girls had to go through a certain amount of training at 
the age of puberty, conforming largely to that customary among the Shuswap. 
Girls were secluded at this time, and had to wear masks of fir-brush when 
they travelled abroad. They also carried wipers of bark, drinking-tubes of

----

788 TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 
swan-bone, single or double pointed scratchers of bone or wood, and small 
combs of bone or wood, all of which they wore on a string around the 
neck. It seems that bone whistles were not used. Tattooing and boring of the ears were generally performed at puberty. 
Pubescent lads wore headbands of cedar-bark. Women lived apart 
during their periods of menstruation. A person's body was buried wherever 
the death occurred, and no attempt seems to have been made until of recent 
years to collect the dead in graveyards. A rude log-fence was generally 
erected around the grave; and some of the deceased's property was sacrificed by 
being buried with the corpse or placed on the grave. Short poles were also 
sometimes erected. Frequently, instead of a log-fence, logs were placed 
alongside of each other on the grave, so as to cover it completely, or brush 
and stones were heaped over it. If a person died in the wintertime, the 
body was buried in the snow, and a pile of brush was heaped on the top. 
Occasionally bodies of wealthy or influential persons were burned, as among 
the Carrier. When a noble died, his clan gave a large funeral feast, and 
distributed part or all of his property, afterwards erecting a carved pole or 
mortuary column at his grave, which was generally rudely carved to represent 
the totem of the clan to which he belonged. A very few graves were 
covered with boxes or small houses of wood, as was the custom of some 
of the Carrier. 
Reuicios. — What scant information 1 was® able to obtain regarding 
the religious conceptions of the Chilcotin, seems to show that they were 
much influenced by their neighbors. Some idea of their beliefs may be 
gathered from their mythology, the bulk of which has been collected by 
Dr. Livingston Farrand! Their mythological tales, however, show much 
evidence of borrowing from the Coast tribes and from the Shuswap. The 
earth and its inhabitants were given their present form partly by transformers 
such as tendixteux, and the Raven. Fire, water, and daylight were stolen 
from other people who possessed them, and then liberated. Thunder is a 
bird with large wings. Giants and cannibals are said to have ‘inhabited the 
country formerly. The stars are transformed beings. The land of shades is 
said by some to be on an island in the west. It was believed by some 
that the spirit land was divided up, each clan — or perhaps sept — having 
its special place in it. It seems that the Ghost dance of the Shuswap had 
penetrated to the eastern bands of the Chilcotin, who held dances occasionally 
after the Shuswap style. Many of the people wore head-bands, belts, and 
necklaces of cedar-bark, as the Coast Indians do in most dances. It appears, 
however. that this dance had not been fully adopted by the tribe, nor did 
they understand the proper meaning of it, as there seems to have been no 
belief in the return of the souls to earth, nor was there any conception of   
Vol. 11, Part 1, of this series.

----

TEIT, THE SHUSWAP. 789 
the deity called by the Shuswap the “Chief of the Dead. or the “Old One” 
Prayers were probably offered more to animals as guardian spirits than to 
natural phenomena. Skulls of bears © were invariably ele- o[@ 
vated on poles. _ All the men of = 7 the tribe had guardian spirits, which they ob- EN 4 tained in the same manner as among the 
neighboring IMterior py u6o Rock puimings from » Bowder South of Amber Laks, Height, tribes. These seem about 160 cm. 
to have been hereditary in some cases. One man informed me that the 
Raven had been a guardian spirit in his family for three generations. Men, when going to war, generally painted their faces half black and half 
red. When. a warrior killed an enemy, he blackened his whole face. 1 did not hear of any war ceremonies or 
dances, as among the Thompson Indians. 
The Chileotin believe in ghosts; 
but I obtained no particulars regarding 
them, excepting that they were like dead 
people. Shamanism flourished, patients 
being treated in a manner similar to that of 
the Shuswap. Some shamans used rattles 
like those of the Coast tribes. There 
were several women shamans. Witchcraft 
was believed in strongly. At the present 
day shamanism is hardly believed in, 
id although it has not disappeared to such 
Fm 1. Comings on Ten Anshen Lake 1 extent as among the Shuswap. a Height, about 160 cm.; 4, Height, about 60 cm. Most members of the tribe are 
nominally Catholics, but they do not appear to be imbued with Christianity 
to the same extent as the Shuswap and Carrier. This may be accounted for 
by the fact that the last-named tribes have had Catholic missionaries resident 
among them for many years, whereas the Chilcotin are only visited once 
or twice annually. There arc three or four small churches in the tribe which 
cannot at all compare with the large and fine edifices to be seen among the 
Shuswap. 
Rock-paintings (Fig. 280) appear to be very scarce in the Chilcotin country, 
but carvings on the bark of trees may frequently be seen (Fig. 281). Those 
which 1 have seen differ a good deal in style from those of the Shuswap.

----



----

INDEX TO VOLUME IIL 
AsgLow shells, 220, 221, 778. Ablution of girls, 468. Abortion, 584. Abstracts, of Chilcotin traditions, 48-54. of Quinault traditions, 128-132. Adams Lake, 461, 46. ‘Adoption of children, 262. Adultery, 21, 592. Adzes, iron, 204, 342. 
stone, 163, 164, 203, 313, 473, 763, 764 African basketry, 484. After-birth, 264, 584. Agate, 203. Agriculture, 761, 762. Alames, story of, 729-733. Alaskan’ basketry, 481-435. carvings, 426. chipped implements, 308. hafted celts, 343, 344. ‘petroglyphs, 330. 
stone axe, 418. Alder, use of, as food, 232. use of bark of, as dye, 205, 219, 764. Alexandria, Indian settlements at, 3, 549, 760, 
762, 763, 784. trading post at, 35. Alexis Creek, 760-762. Alkali Lake Shuswap, 458, 450, 464. Amur baskets, 484, 487, 489. Anahem, derivation of name, 760. Anahem Lake, 3, 781, 789. Anahem Peak, 763. Anahem Reservation, 3, 459, 762. Ancestors, mythical, of Carrier and Chilcotin, 253. of Lillooet, 252-255, 258, 286. of Shuswap, 507. Anchors, 358, 350, 367-360. Anderson, A. A., 340. Anderson’ Lake, 195, 253. Animal bones, finds of, in Puget Sound region, 
307, 331, 357, 37%, 372 designs, 181, 183-185, 234, 259, 330, 353, 412, 418-429, 434, 486, 489, 493, 774, 
779, 780, 787. 
pets, 250. Animals, beliefs and customs regarding, 279, 600, 603, 603. hunted by Chileotin, 781, 782.   Animals, hunted by Lillooet, 227. hunted by Shuswap, 58. parts of, as guardian spirits, Go, 610. Anklets, 178, 231. Ant (myth), 756. ‘Antler carvings, 141, 166, 185-187, 380, 429, 438. celthafis, 141, 164-166, 185-188, 314, 318, 
341-344, 377, 431. engraved designs on, 353, 354, 375. finds in Puget Sound region, 145, 347, 389. implements, 13, 161, 162, 171, 203, 204, 315, 
334 337, 353, 475: method of cutting, 302. 
uses of, 165, 166, 168, 185, 371, 375, 420, 474. Antlertips, 173, 174, 377: Anvils, 158, 168, 312, 359, 474. Aprons, 213, 506, 507. ‘Archaeology of British Columbia and Washing: 
ton, 55-75, 304. of the Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound, 
301-441. of Lower Fraser River, British Columbia, 133-101. 
Argyle, Albert A, 56, 58, 360, 36%, 414. Amor, 234, 538, 785. Arowflakers, 203, 473, 475. Arrowheads or spear-heads, Chilcotin, 763. Lillooet, 203, 225, 234. from Lower Fraser region, 140-143, 17%, 181. from Puget Sound region, 308-310, 332-334, 
355 379-381, 383, 395, 396, 438, 439- Shuswap, 473, $19- Arrow Lake Shuswap, 455, 462, 466, 471. Arrow Lakes, the, 451, 435- 
  ‘Arrows, hunting, 725, 518, 519, 781, 782. 
magic, story of, 714, 715. 
method of charming, $30. paintings or private marks on, 35%, 475, 519, 
    174, 225, 235, 539, 782. 
Arrow-smoothers, 203, 474, 519. Armowstone, 225, 519, 546, 584. Ant, Alaskan, 419. of interior of British Columbia, 191, 500. of Fraser River region, 133, 181-185, 190, 
352, 353, 420, 422, 437-429, 434, 435. of Northwest coast, 191, 352, 418. 
[791]

----

792 
Att, of Puget Sound region, 352, 353, 431, 434 See Baskets, Basketry, Carvings, Ornamenta- 
tion, Painting, Sculptures. Ashcroft, 458, 463. 
Ashes found in shell-heaps, 137, 130. 
Ashworth, Daniel, 364-367, 420. 
Athapascan tribes, 3, 451, 759. bags and baskets, 488, 490. 
‘beliefs of, regarding souls, 612. 
characteristics of, 4, 
foreign relations of, 468. 
mythology of, 4, 80. Atnah Indians, 449, 470. 
Aurora, beliefs regarding, 507. 
Aws, of Chilcotin, 775. 
of Lillooet, 205. 
from Lower Fraser region, 141, 169-172, 188. 
from Puget Sound region, 316, 317, 347, 34%, 372, 374, 376-378, 380, 389, 399, 392, 303, 
434 439. of Shuswap, 474, 475, 508. Axes, 360, 365, 366, 418-420. 
BABY-CARRIERS, 261, #70, 787. See Cradles. Back-at of an animal, 672. Badger and Skunk, story of, 749, 750. 
Bagnets, 227, 228, 524, 526, 530, 779. 
Bags, miniature, 87. ormamentation of, 497, 498, 590, 774, 775. skin, 217, 498-500, 774, 776. 
woven, 209, 216, 217, 490, 491, 497, 498, 673, 774-176. Set also Carrying-bags. Bailers, 230, 532. Bald Knob, Orcas Island, 63. Ball, story of the, 642. Bancroft, H. H, cited, 56, 50, 135, 305. on the archeology of British Columbiz, 304. 
Barbed points, 150-153, 309, 319, 332, 333, 335~ 337, 388, 391. See also Harpoon points. Barf, Lionel C., 326. Bark breakers, 176, 177, 317. Bark-peclers, 475, 515, 781. ‘Barnacles found in shell-heaps, 13. Basalt, uses of, 203, 763. Basketry cap of Thompson Indians, so7. dishes, a15, 216. fish-traps, 527-529. hats, 440. mats, 209, 210, 215. ‘patterns, 206, 207, 766, 767, 769. rattle, 257. See Baskets. Baskets, bark, 205, 216, 477-489, 496-498, 516, 
724, 764.   INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
Baskets, coiled, 205-207, 215, 440, 483, 484 487-490, 765-1773. forms of, 477, 487. implements used in making, 147, 168, 170, 
316, 317. making of, important industry of Thompson Indians, 469. miniature, 587. open-work, 206, 207, 216, 489, 490. omamentation of, 206, 307, 478-487, 489, 764-774. variety and uses of, 215, 216, 496, 776, 780. 
woven, 207, 209, 211, 477, 489, 496, 765-773. Beacon Hill mounds and trenches, 356. Beads, 134, 176, 179, 180, 186, 220, 324, 502, 
503, 500, 570, 778 Bear clan of Lillooet, 252-254. Bears, beliefs regarding, 586, 587, 696, 607. finds of bones of, in Lower Fraser region, 141. formerly prolific in Shuswap country, 460. hunting of, s22-s24, 602. skulls of, elevated on poles by Chilcotin, 789. 
stories regarding, 19-24, 39, 59, 51, 638, 749. 
Bearsong, 279. Beauty, Shuswap ideas of personal, siz. Beaver Indians, 451, 472. Beavernets, 523. Beavers, beliefs regarding, 281. finds of bones of, in Lower Fraser region, 141. hunting of, 523. stories regarding, 654, 653, 677, 678, 680-684. Beaver-teeth, objects made of, 203, 318, 346, 347, 413, 474 Beds and bedding, 177, 214, 215, 496, 776. Beecher Bay caims, 58. Beliefs, current, of Lillooet, 261, 263, 200, 291. of Shuswap, 586, 587, 619, 620. Bella Coola, trade-routes near, 784. Bella Coola’ Indians, diseases of, 463. foreign relations of, 3, 760-763, 783, 784. mythology of, 5-7. social organization of, 254. utensils of, 488. Bella Coola River, 761. 
Belts, 218, 219, 506, 777. Berries, gathering of, 256, 282, 514, 515. ‘method of preserving, 16. supply of, among Quinault, 79. varieties and uses of, 205, 223, 262, 514, $15,780. Berry-baskets, 215, 216, 497. Big Bar Creek Shuswap, 438, 450, 464. Big Bear Creek, rock-paintings on, sor. Bird headdress represented on clubhandles, 
404-406.

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL. 
Bird quill, 509. Birds, finds of bones of, in shell-heaps, 331. stories regarding, 658, 639-663, 671, 685, 607, 698, 722-724, 749. 
Birth, customs regarding, 260, 295, 584. Blackfeet, the, 452, 472. Blackwater River, 237, 762. Blankets, bark, gr. dogrhair, 210, 211, 223. goathair, 18, 233, S04, 777. how Indians first obtained, story of 48, 54. method of weaving, 210, 311, 775. skin, 218, 504. woven, of strips of skin, 213, 491, 504. woollen, 508. Blind man, story of a, cured bya loon, 35, 36, 52. Blood as guardian spirit, 610, 616. Blood feuds, 236. Blucjay stories, 80-107, 128130, 661-668. Boas, Franz, as director of Jesup Expedition, 447, 750. cairns near Victoria examined by, 56, 58. carved whale vertebra found by, 184. cited, passin. on art of Northwest coast, 440. on basketry of Chilcotin, 767-773. on basketry of the Shuswap, 477-488. on basketcap of Thompsons, 507 (footnote 4). on clubs made of bone of whale, 03-412. on crania of Lower Fraser River Indians, 188-190. on petroglyphs, 324-326, 329, 330- specimens collected, by, 321. Bodices, 218. Bonaparte River, fish formerly abundant in, 460. Bone implements, decorated, 153, 171, 181-183, 
320, 321, 404-412. omaments, 509, sto. points from Fraser River region, 135, 137, 144-153, 171, 181. point, Lillooet, 225. points from Puget Sound region, 309, 319, 
334, 335, 358, 368, 374, 380, 387, 388, 301. Bones, animal, in shell heaps, 136, 140, 141. human, rarely found in shellheaps in area of cairns, 58. Bottles for storing oil, 517. Boundaries, tribal, 3, 541, 762. Boundary Bay, 361. Bound-one, story of Grasshopper and the, 655, 656. Bowlders found in shellheaps, 158, 167. on Chilcotin River, 784. Bows, decoration of, 224, 325, 475, S18. flat, 224, 782. 
    793 
Bows, power of, 520. sinew-backed, 518, 782. uses of, 475, 518. Bowstring, 224, 519, 782. Boxes, wooden, 437, 488, 776. Boys, puberty ceremonials of, 265-367, 588-599, 
603, 787, 788. Bracelets, 179, 182, 183, 221, 510. Brann’s Logging Camp, 379. Brass, personal ornaments of, 220, 510. Breech-cloths, 218, 2x9, 502, 596, 777. Bridge Creek, incident of women digging roots 
near, 548, 549. Bridge River, 237, 253-254. 
Bridles, 534. British Columbia, cairns of, 55-75. connection between interior and coast of, in prehistoric times, 190, 439. prehistoric peoples of, 440. shell-heaps of, on Lower Fraser River, 133-191. Brooke, Reginald C., 135, 136, 143-144, 159, 175, 176, 181. Bryden, John, 324. Buckets, Lillooet, 216. Buckskin Creek, 464. Bulrushes, use of, in mat-making, 208, 209. Buoys or floats, description of, 525. Burial, customs regarding, 263, 269-273, 296, 
548, 554, 593-504, 788. 
methods of, 57, 134, 190, 191, 321, 322, 354, 
380, 387, 434, 439, 441, 788. 
See also Cairn-burials. Burial-ground, ancient, near Comox, 305. Buriak-mounds, 57, 59, 69, 136, 361. Burning of warriors’ bodics, 548, 554, 592. See Cremation. Burrard Inlet, explorations at, 140, 361, 418, 
420, 425 Burton, Wash., explorations at or near, 175, 
393-399, 416, 418, 420. Buttons, 177, 220, 
Cacurs, 215, 495, 776. Cactus, uses of, 222, 224, 515. 
Cadboro Bay, B. C., 56, 50, 67-74, 303, 356. Cairn-burials, 187,101, 271, 272, 321, 322, 436, 441. Caiike structures, s8, 362. Cairns of British Columbia and Washington, s5- 
75, 303-397, 339, 331, 354-356, 360, 361, 367, 372, 378, 386, 434, 435 Cakes, berry, 516. Californian axes, 366, 418. basketry, 484. clubs, 415. 
 

----

794 
Calls for game, 52, 521, 568, 699. Camano Island, 373. Canadian Geological Survey, 56. Canadian Pacific Railway, 61, 136. Canim Lake, 447, 460, 465. Cannibal dance, 580, 581. Cannibals, beliefs regarding, 595, 615, 783. stories regarding, 632, 635-637, 640, 641, 644— 
651, 670, 671, 687-689, 714, 715, 730) 731, 
735, 736, 743, 744, 754 755, 757 758. 
Canoe Creek, 447, 449, 455, 450, 464. Canoe Pass, 330. 
Canoe runways, 133, 362, 434. Canoes, description of, 228-230, 434, 531, 532, 782, 783. disposition of, at death of owner, 269, 503. use of, in hunting or fishing, 523, 525, 526. Cafion division of Shuswap, 453, 454, 458, 459, 
464, 470, 471. Cape Lazo, 57, 303, 305, 321. Cape Mudge, 322. 
Caps, 219, 220, 505-507, 524 777. © Caribou in Shuswap country, 460. Caribou Hills, 782. Carrier Indians, 449, 457. armor used by, $38, 539. art of, 509. bags and baskets used by, 477, 490. characteristics of, 471, 763. explorations in country of, 447. 
foreign relations of, 3, 4 469, 470, 535, 760, 762, 763. 784, 786. houses of, 776. hunting-methods of, 524. 
language of, 450, 763. ‘mythical ancestors of, 253. mythology of, 4, 5, 14 (footnote). not mat-makers, 774. social organization of, 786. tattooing common among, 12. tribal names of, 195, 451. wars of, 541, 549, 784. 
Carriers. See Baby<arricrs, Cradles. 
Carrying-bags, 499, 532, 533. 
Carryingbaskets, 477, 498. Carving, art of, well developed in Fraser River Delta, 133. style of, on Vancouver Island, 176, 440. See Ornamentation. Carvings, of animal forms, 159, 181-186, 340, 430-429, 434, 779, 780. in antler, 141, 166, 185-187, 380, 420, 438. in bark of trees, 282, 283, 78. 
in bone, 184, 310, 321, 404-412, 439:   INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
Carvings, of human figures, 184-187, 272, 213, 
320, 321, 353, 354 430-434, 426-428, 431, 
43 438. in hydrocarbon, 183, 187. in ivory, 319. in stone, 166, 181, 184-186, 303, 420-424, 432. 
in wood, 213, 273, 273, 399, 323, 409, 576, 
787, 788. See Sculptures. Catlin collection, 435, 486. Catal stalks, use of, for mat-making, 135. 
Ca'wa, story of, 651, 652. . Cayuse Creek, 195, 200. Cedar, tools for preparing, 434. 
‘uses of bark of, 133, 177, 209, 213, 219, 434, 174- uses of roots of, 205, 487. uses of wood of, 133, 188, 214, 216, 234. Celery, wild, 212, 515. Cellars. See Caches, Storageplaces. 
Celt-blades, material for, 167, 340. Celthafts of antler, 141, 164-166, 185-188, 314, 
318, 341-344, 377, 437. Celts, from Lower Fraser r 183. 
from Puget Sound region, 313, 349, 34%, 359, 360, 365, 379, 376, 380, 389, 30%, 401. Shuswap, 473. Cemetery, Indian, at Comox, 306. Ceremonials, winter, 286. Charcoal found in shell-heaps, 136-138, 307, 374: 
use of powdered, for black paint, 205. Charming an arrow, method of, 539. Charms, 291, 619. Chehalish Indians, 416, 440. Chery, wild, 222. Cherry-bark, use of, in basketry, 480. 
Cherikut Lake, 3, 760-762, 774, 781. 
Chickadee, 693, 694, 697, 749, 751- Chief of the dead, 284, 285, Gos, 612, 789. See Old Man, Oli-One. “Chief's children,” 254, 255. 
Chiefs, Chilotin, 786. Lillooet, 254, 255, 257 
Shuswap, 569, 570, 573, 574, 576, 577, 582. 
Chico Lake, 3, 750-761, 773, 774: Chileo River, 761. Chileotin Cafion, 536, 642. Chilcotin Indians, 750-785. 
basketry of, 206, 207, 477, 480, 481, 487, 489, 
496, 764-774. burial customs of, 788. characteristics of, 471, 541, 763. 
childhood, puberty, death, 787, 788. 
clothing and ornaments of, 777-779.   
, 140, 163-165, 
 

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
Chileotin Indians, country of, 447, 760. foodsupply of, 779-782. foreign relations of, 3, 4, 302, 469, 760-763, 
784-786, 788. 
games and pastimes of, 249, 785, 786. habitat of, 3, 451, 459, 467, 759-763. 
houses and house furnishings of, 775~777- hunting-grounds of, 256. 
language of, 450, 763. 
‘manufactures of, 763-782. ‘mythical ancestors of, 253. mythology of, 1-54, 786. population of, 761. red dye used by, 476. religion of, 788, 789. root-digger, 513, 514. smallpox among, 463. social organization, 786, 787. subsistence, 779782. trade, S04, 535, 76%, 779, 782-184. travel, 782-784. tribal divisions, 760. tribal name, 195. 
wars, 236, 237, 462, 541-546, 549, 554, 555 784, 185. See also “Stone Chilcotin.” Chilcotin River, British Columbia, 3, 459, 464, 
759-761, 779, 784, 786. Childhood, 261, 262, 584-586, 787. Chilkat, Alaska, 418. Chilliwack, the, stone statue of, 430, 431. 
Chinese, the, 357, 452, 747, 763. Chinlac, massacre at, 784. Chinook Indians, canoe of, 229. deformation of heads of, 60. language of, 3, 202. mythology of, 7, 80, 81. Chinook wind, story of liberation of, 624, 625. Chipmunk and Owl, story of, 654. Chipped implements, £40, 308. points, 142-144, 174, 190, 308, 332, 361, 379, 
437, 439, 473: stone work, specimens of typical, 357. Chippewa baskets, 485. Chipping, stone used for, 203. Chisels, antler, 474, 475, 764. bone, 162, 315, 375, 474. stone, 188, 303, 704. Chizaikut Lake. See Chesikut Lake. Choke-cherry, 222. Churches, 496, 789. Church Hill near Beecher Bay, 58. Churn Creek, 762. Cinches, horsehair, 534.   795 
Circles, engraved, tools for making, 474. Clallam, basket from, 483. Clamshells found in shell-heaps, 136, 130. Clan legend represented on Lillooet masks, 253, 
254, 257. system, Chilcotin, 786. totems, 213, 283, 300, 787, 788. Clans, list of Lillooet, 252. Clark collection, 367, 372. Clay, burnt, found in shell-heaps, 137, 138. Clothing, bark, 133, 177, 188, 209, 217-219, 
502, 593, 505, 507, 588, 589, 777. cotton, 508. fur, 218, 496, 502-505, 508. omamentation of, 218-220, 502-505, 598, 509, 
543, 777. of pubescent youth, 264, 265, 588, 589. skin, 188, 209, 210, 217-220, 502-509, 524 
588, 589, 777. woollen, 217, 219, 504, 508. Clubs, bone of whale, 349, 303, 403-412, 439, 440. stone, 140, 174-176, 412-418. war, 175, 176, 184, 234, 366, 538, 540, 666. Coast Indians, 195, 202, 220, 236, 540, 784. 
Coast Range, 195, 759, 761. Coast Salish tribes, 105, 254, 202, 45. Cockle-shells found in shell-heaps, 139. Codd, Robert L., 136. Collinson, T., 417. Colors, 205, 221, 29%, 475, 476, 508. Columbia River, basketry, 440, 487. clubs, 403. fishing on, 467. Shuswap of, 451. stone sculptures from, 425. Combination-suis, 503, 504, 777. Comblike object from shell heap, 176, 177. Combs, 221, 511, 513, 588, 589, 778, 788. Comox, B. C., art of region near, ror. cairns located near, 56, 57, 305, 321. ceithafts from, 344. description of shellheaps in and near, 184, 
303-324. hammer-stones from, 312, 437. ‘petroglyphs near, 324-326, 330. Comox Indians, foreign relations of, 762. Comox River, 57. Comparison of mythologies, 4, 5, 7, So. Compass, points of, 274. Conduits in baby-carriers, 261, 787. Cooking, methods of, 161, 223, S16, 517. Cooking stones, 311, 338, 359. Cooking-vessels of Shuswap, 496, 516. Copalis Rock Indians notorious for vermin, 85.

----

796 
Copper arrow-poiats, 225. clabs, x74, 413, 414. fish-hooks, 228. knives, 204. i omaments found with skeletons, 56, 6%, 65, 134, | 140, 176-178, 186. omaments of Chilcotin, 778. ormaments of Lillooet, 220. omaments of Shuswap and Thompson, 509, 510. tubes used as a rattle, 264. Copper, breaking a, 166. cutting of, 203. | occurrence of, on San Juan Island, 385. | trade in, 233, 783. “Coppers,” 328. Corals, for catching deer, 226, 521, 522. for catching fish, 527-530. Cottonwood, uses of, 205, 228, 229. ] Councils, Lillooet, 257. Coupeville, Wash. 56, 378, 435. Courtney, caims near, 57, 321. shell-heap near, 305-307. Couteau or Thompson Indians, 451. Cowichan, shellheaps at, 324. specimens from, 415, 420, 422, 424. Coyote, beliefs regarding, 281, 595-597, 612. flesh of, sometimes eaten, 225. relatives of, 671. 
mythical, 253, 274. 
skin of, used for aprons, 218. stories regarding, 621-642, 658, 659, 669, 670, 677, 678, 680, 683, 684, 703, 707, 737-146. Coyote clan of Lillooet, 252, 253. “Coyote Sweat-Houses,” 453, 454 Cradles, 584-586, 787. See Baby-<arricrs. Crane mask, 254. Cranes, story regarding, 723, 724. Crania from Lower Fraser River, 188-190. Cree Indians, characteristics of, 472, 550. 
clothing of, 507, 508, 550. foreign relations of, 454, 460, 468. habitat of, 451. language of, 449, 455- Shuswap name for, 452. subsistence of, 524 trade relations of, 535. wars of, 540-542, 546, 549-553, 667. Cremation, 322, 548, 554, 593, 785. 
Crest groups, Shuswap, 576, 577, Sor. Crow, stories regarding, 684, 710, 711. Crowhurst, Charles, 7. Cruppers, 534. Culture of coast and interior of British Columbia, 
    differences in, 190, 19x. INDEX TO VOLUME II. 
Culture, ancient, of Fraser River Delta, 190, 439. of Lillooet Indians, influence of coast culture on, 441. ancient, of Puget Sound area, 441. ancient, of Saanich Peninsula, 355, 439- Culture-beroes, 4, 5, So. Cups, 216, 500, 501, 776. CutofiHand (Xaa'kst), 556. Cypress-wood, 224, 307. Cysts, 55, 61, 68, 70-74, 435. See also Cairns. 
Dacozs, bone, 174, 234, 343, 349. 
stone, 140, 144, 160, 473. Dale, James M., collector, 136, 158. Dalgleishe, Mr., 362. Damon, George H., collection of, 416. Dances, clothing and ornaments worn at, 257, 777, 788. religious, 268, 276, 283, 284, 286, 603-605, 788. social, 257, 268, 384, 578-581. use of drums and rattles at, 257, 575, 787. use of masks and whistles at, 554, 257. 
war, 235, 543, 610. - Dawson, George W., 134, 135, 304. Day and night, story of origin of, 625, 626, 738. Day Dawn, 587, 603. Daylight, origin of, 14, 15, 40. Dead, chief of the, 284, 285, 60g, 612, 780. See Old-Man, Old-One. offerings to the, Gor. Deadfalls, 226, 227, 523, 524. Deadman’s Creek, 455, 461, 465. Deans, James, 56, 58. Death, beliefs regarding, 274, 290, 600, 602. Deception Pass, ancient campsite near, 379. 
Decoys, 530, 779- Deep Bay, explorations along, 323. Deer, abundant in Quinault country, 7. beliefs regarding, 275, 586. methods of catching, 226, S21, 521, 524. See Snares, Traps. stories regarding, 606, 607, 653, 654- uses of, 188, 212, 221. Deer people, 635. Deformation of heads, 6o, 139, 262, 354, 381, 
382, 384, 586. Déné or Athapascan stock, 451, 759. Denman Island, 57, 307, 321. Dentalia, 180, 219-221, 231, 320, 505, 506, 
508-519, 777, 778. “Dentalia people,” name of Chilcotin, 750. Departure Bay, 422. Desertion, stories of, 709-711. Designs. See Ornamentation.    
 

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
Dice, 190, 248, 564, 785. Digging stick, decorated, 182. Diggingtools, 475. Diorite, uses of, 163. Dirty-Lad, story of, 711-713. Discovery Island, B. C., cairns on, 8. Diseases. See Smallpox, Tuberculosis, Disembowelling, practice of, 237, 245. Dishes, bark, 432, 483, 496, 776. 
stone, 353, 420-427, 429. ‘wooden, 216. Dixon, Roland B., 136. explorations of, 304, 361, 362. Dog Creek, 447, 458, 459. cave near, 58, 591. Shuswap of, 464. Doghalters, 226. “Dog-plant,” 520, Dog pups, tradition relating to, common to near] the whole Northwest, 4. Dogs, prehistoric remains of, 141, 188, 307, 331. stories regarding, 7-14, 34, 35, 43, 49, 57, 80, 127, 138, 132. treatment of, 593. uses of, 210, 21%, 218, 233, 226, 517, 520, S524, 532 533, 782, 783. Dogwood, uses of, 22t, 225. Dolphin, bones of, found in shell-heaps of the Lower Fraser, 140. Dorsey, George A., excavation of cairns by, 56, 56. Dream-names, 295. Dream-pictures, 590. Dream-records, 282. Dreams, 266, 511, 586, 606-609, 620. Dress, style of Lillooet, 222. ceremonial, of Shuswap, 577-579. See Clothing. Drilling, use of bows for, 475. Drills, 380, 438. See Fire-drils. Drinking tubes, 264, 588, 589, 787. Drums, 575, 581, 583, 787. Drying food, methods of; 28, 516, 517. Drying-frames, 516, 780. Dugeouts, 228, 229, 531, 532. Dungeness, shellheaps at, 439. Dwarfs, 376, 724. Dwellings, communal, 213, 294. 
lodges, 213, 215, 460, 403-495, 776. log-cabins, 214, 215, 494-496, 776. names of rooms in Shuswap, 492. plank houses, 133, 213, 214, 776. prehistoric, of Fraser River region, 188. prehistoric, of Puget Sound region, 373, 433. shelters, 495, 776. 
    797 
Dwellings, sweat-houses, 215, 495. tents, 458, 494, 776. underground, 212-214, 460,470, 492, 495, 775- 
Dyes and dyeing, 205, 206, 219, 475, 476, 764, 775, 782. 
EAGLEFEATHERS, method of procuring, 523. uses of, 220, 543. value of, 505, 500, 537. Eagle-head masks, club-handles resembling, 404. Eagles, method of catching, 523. nests of, common property, 256. stories of, 38, 39, 53, 115, 130, 634, 635, 
727-729. Ear-omaments, 220, 509, 777, 778. Earthquakes, beliefs regarding, 59s. 
‘Earth-works, 303, 304, 306, 360, 390. Eburne, description of shellheaps at, 134, 135, 139-146, 148-165, 167-175, 177-180, 183 187, 322, 416. 
Eggs, story of Coyote and, 683, 684. Eliza Island, shellheaps on, 372. Elk, abundant in Quinault country, 79. beliefs regarding, 658. stories of, 126, 127, 132. uses of, 188, 219. See also Calt-hafs. Elkatsho, 763. Elkwa, story of, 696-698. Embankments in British Columbia and Washing ton, opp. 56. Embroidery, 206, 220, 587. See Ornamentation. Emmons, G. T., collector, 418. 
Empire Valley, 438, 450, 464, 470. 
Engraver's tools, “375, 474. Engraving. See Ornamentation. Esquimalt, 303, 437. Ethical concepts and teaching of Shuswap, 617. European folklore, 729, 753. Evil beings, 596. Excrement, transformation of, 16, 49. Export, articles of, from Lillooet country, 222. Eye shades, 525. 
FACEPAINTING, 221, 260, 502, 511, 778, 779. of dancers, 257, 284. designs used in, Got, Goz, 606, 608. of gamblers, 608. of hunters, 279, 602. of pubescent youth, 264, 266, 267. substances used for, 475, 476, 511. of warriors, 235, 511, 608, 789. Faces, forms of, in petroglyphs, 325, 327, 330. Face-wash, 221. False Creek, Vancouver, 140, 361.

----

798 
Famines, stories of, 32, 33, 52, 700, 701. Farrand, Livingston, cited, 8o, passim. researches of, 750. ‘Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, 1-54, 788. ‘Traditions of the Quinault Iudians, 77-132. Fasting, 264, 266, 284, 206, 588. Feasts, in celebration of birth, 584. of first fruits, Gor. funeral, 593, 788. 
“letting.down,” 259, 574. 
of Shuswap, 574, 593. of Thompson, 469, 574. Sec also Fustivals, Potlatchss. Feathers, as article of trade, 537. mode of procuring, 589. uses of, 220, 519, 520, 539. See Eagle feathers. Festivals, religious, 283-286, 603~605. 
social, 257-259. 
See also Fasts, Files, 203, 204. Firtrees, 133, 137-139. Fire, beliefs regarding, 283, 788. lighting of, between enemies, token of concili- 
ation, 235, 247. lighting of, on mountaintops, 59. making of, sor. 
origin of, 15, 49, 274. Firearms, 540. Firerills, 217, sor, sar. See also Drills. Fireplace, location of, 213. Fish, as staple food of Fraser River Indians, 133. methods of drying, 517. ‘methods of transporting, 532. stories of, 669-671. varieties of, 513, 669. 
Fish-baskets, 216. 
Fisher, stories of, 41, 53, 673-677, 752, 753 Fisherman's Bay, Lopez Island, 63. Fishhooks, 228, 525, 779. Fishing, methods of, 227, 228, 524-530, 779, 780. rights and privileges regarding, 256. Fishing implements, 153, 168, 337. See also Fish. hooks, Fisihlines, Fishnets, Fish-spears, Fish traps. Fishknives, slate, 140, 159, 160, 188, 204, 315, 
316, 345, 346, 350, 439. See Knives. Fishlines, 491, 535. Fishnets, 168, 212, 227, 49%, 525-527, 530, 775, 779: Fishiskin shoes, 219. 
Fish-spears, 525, 779. 
Fish-traps, 524, 527-530, 779. Faking, stone used for, 203. Flatbows, the, 452.   INDEX TO VOLUME II, 
Floats, 535. Floorcoverings, 215, 776. Folk tales, European, 729, 753. | Food, storing of, 214, 223, 495. See Caches, Callas. varieties and preparation of, 161, 188, 221, 223, 433, 13-517, 533, 779-782. Foodbags, 499. Food-dishes, 316, 776. Food-mats, 215, 216, 776. Fortresses, 235, 236, 530, 540. Fort Rupert, Vancouver Island, 313, 330. Foster's Bar, 200. Fountain people, 253-254, 463. Fountain, The, trading place, 536. Fowke, Gerard, 304. Cairns of British Columbia and Washington, 
75. desighon of Cadboro Bay cairn by, 69-74. Foxes, stories of, 624, 625, 633-635, 741-743 Fraser, Simon, descent of Fraser River, 449, 533. on clothing of Thompson, 535. on dress and oraments of Shuswap, 502. on fortifications along Fraser River, 540. on graves of Shuswap, 503. on slaves of Chilcotin, 763. on smoking among Shuswap, 574. on underground. houses of Shuswap, 492. on warshields, 538. opinion of, regarding Shuswap, 470. Fraser River, boundary between Chilcotin and Shuswap, 3. description. of shell-heaps of, 56, 58, 133-191, 304, 361, 362, 435, 436. 
effect of discovery of gold on, 761. explorations on, 447, 53. fishing on, 524. implements and utensils found in shellheaps of, 188, 313, 314, 316, 317, 33%, 339, 344, 345, 415 modern tribes of, 133, 188-190, 195, 210, 211, 236, 254, 20%, 296, 451, 453, 457, 438, 464) 466, 470, 471. prehistoric people of, 133, 141, 181, 188-190, 355, 420, 422, 427-420, 434, 436, 438, 440. Frog clan of Lillooet, 252, 253. Fruits, first, 383, Gor. Fulford Harbour, Salt Spring Island, B. C, 181. Fur clothing. See Clothing. Furs, trade in, §35-537- Future life, beliefs regarding, 286, 287. 
GATS, 530. Gamblers, face-painting of, 608.

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
‘Gamblers, guardian spirits of, 606, 607. stories about, 38, 53, 726-739. training of, $88, S90. Gamblingsticks, decoration of, 475, 476. Game, division of, 256. ‘methods of carrying, 532, 533. Games, ball, 24, 564. canoeracing, 565. cards, 249, 564, 566. : catscradle, 250, 565. catapults 2), 330. cup-and-ball, 564. dice, 190, 248, 564, 785. foot racing, 249, 565, 566. gambling, 248, 566, 785. 
hoop, 249, 320, 338. 
horse-racing, 233, 249, 259, 565, 566. 
jumping, 565. lacrosse, 564. lehal. 38, 248, 564, 566, 785. pulling, 565. ring, 248, 564-566. shooting, 249, 565. snowshoe-racing, $65. stick, 564. swimming matches, 249, $65. throwing-contests, 250, 565. 
tobogganing, 566. tugs of war, 249. wrestling, 249, 565. Fw, 83 (footnote). Garters, 219. Ghost dances, 28, 788. Ghosts, 286, 288, 200, 208, 611, 620, 78. Giants, beliefs regarding, 788. stories of, 125, 126, 132, 713. . Gig Harbor, near Tacoma, Wash., 4oo. Gilstrap, William H, gos. Girls, puberty ceremonial of, 263-265, 205, 587, 
$588, 590, 6o1, 6o3, 787, 788. Glasier, C. E., collector, 343. Glue, 519. Goat-horn found in shellheaps, 161. Goat woman, story of the, 748. Goat-wool, uses of, 210, a15, 219. Goose-quills, 220. Gordon Head, cairns reported at, 58. Government Spit, grave findsat, 305, 312, 313, 323. Gowan, H. H,, 135. Grant, Hugh, shell-heap on farm of, 306, 317-320. Grapes, Oregon, 222. Grass, uses of, 206, 212, 216. Grasshopper, storics of, 655, 636. Grave-boxes, 272.   799 
Gravedfences, 322, 373. Grave-houses, 322, 323, 788. Grave-poles, 269, 270, 272, 273, 39, 322, 59%, 
593, 788. Graves, covered by bowlders, 59. erection of carved figures at, 273, 576, 581, 593- in stone cairs, 55. in talus slopes, 59. Graveyards, 593, 788. Gray's Harbor, 369, 416. Great Central Lake, petroglyph near, 336. 
Green Lake, 536, 557. “Greenstone,” use of, for arrow-points, 225. Green Timber band of Shuswap, 460, 465. Grinding stones, 188. Grinnell, G. B,, cited, 31. Grisly bear, beliefs regarding, 263. claws of, 2at, 509. stories of, 625, 626, 630-63, 678, 679, 681— 
686, 691-696, 708, 735-718, 720-732, 738, 759 751. Grooved stones, 168, 337, 338, 367. Grooves, cutting of, 167, 474. Grouping of common people among Shuswa 77-582. . Grouse, story of Coyote and, 740. Guardian spirits, 265, 266, 282, 283, 204, 205, 
208, 493, 603, Go5-611, 616, 625, 789. See Manitous. Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound, archaeology of, sor-441. general conclusions 
43-441. Guns, 520. from _ explorations of, 
Hamations. See Duellings. Hated implements, imitations of, 41g. Hafting, methods of, 165, 166, 204, 314, 341, 
343, 344, 365, 366, 437, 474, 764. Hair, cut, thrown into river, 603. cutting of, 221, 271, 296. styles of dressing, 221, 235, 261, 263, 265, 266, 
469, 510, 543, 588, 608, 778. Hairoil, str. Hair-wash, 511. Haliotisshell from shellheaps, 319. Halos, 275. ‘Halters, dog, 520. horse, 534. Hammers, antler, 203. stone, 140, 156-158, 163, 188, 311, 338, 339, 
389, 473, 474) 764. ‘Hammerstones, 163, 163, 313, 437, 764. Hammocks, 261, 496.

----

800 
Hancevill, 760-763, 786. Hare, beliefs regarding, 281. stories of, 624, 625, 654, 678. Haro Strat, 57. Harpoon-line, attachment for, 152. ‘Harpoon-points, barbs for, 148, 309, 310, 388. of bone, barbed, 137, 149-153, 182, 183, 310, 
334-336, 352, 353, 358, 379, 301. decorated, 153, 182, 183, 334, 337, 35% 353, 438. of shell, 341. Harpoons, 188, Harrison Lake, 225. Hasrison River, 200. Hastings, Oregon C., caims examined by, s6, 55. explorations of, on Vancouver Island, 304. report of explorations near Victoria, 356. Hatsic, burial mounds at or near, 57, 60,61, 361. Hawai, resemblance of clubs from, to those from Vancouver Island, 403. Head-bands, 219, 220, 257, 263, 505, 596, 585, 
580, 777, 788. 
Head deformation, Go, 139, 362, 354, 381, 382, 384, 586. Head-wash, 221. Hemp, Indian; 218. 
Herber, Louis, collection of, 331, 333, 337, 339, Sar. Herbs, sacred, 425. Hereditary chiefs, 254. names, 570, 571. ‘Hermaphrodites, 267. Heye, George G., 485, 486, 523. High Bar band of Shuswap, 438, 459, 464. HillTout, Charles, cited, 28, 135, passim. collector, 135, 158. on the Chilliwack, 40. on the Lillooet Indians, 292, 293. Himes, George H, gor. Hindshaw, W. H, explorations of, 361. Flobbles, 534. Hogfennel, 644, 651. Hooks, fish, 238, 525, 779. Hom, uses of, 216, 220, 233. ‘Horse-brands, similarity of, to basket property- marks, 774. ‘Horsehair, use of dyed, for decorative purposes, 
479, 480, 764. Horseraces, 233, 249, 250, 565, 566. Horses, among the Lillooet, 199, 220, 239, 533, 
535, 548, 549, 783. Hospitality of Lillooet, 257. Hotsprings, 276, 207. House furnishings, 215-217, 496-501. House-sies, traces of, near Cadboro Bay, 58, 356.   INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
‘Housessites, near Comox, 306. at New Dungeness, 386, 387. “Houses. See Duellings. Hove Sound, 200, 236. Huckleberries (Vaccinium 5p), 222. 
Hudson Bay Company, 58, 306, 356, 537, 575, 
621, 730. - “Hudson Bay plant” 520. Hummingbird, 275. ‘Humpback salmon, 281. Humphrey, J, 324. ‘Hunger, story of, 700, 701. See Famines. Hunter, beliefs regarding, 269, 279, 280, 281, 607, 608. clothing worn by, 506, 524. facial painting of, 279, Goz. guardian spirits of, 283. 
stories of, 6, 30, 44-46, 51, 54, 718-720. 
training of, 580, S90. Hunter's Bay, Lopez Island, cams at, 63. ‘Hunting, 188, 324, 455, 518-524, 762, 781, 782. Hunting-dogs, treatment of, 520, Hunting-grounds, 256, 455, 462. Huntinglodges, 215. ‘Hunting parties, occasional murders by, 236, 237. 
    
Ics, hunting through holes in, 523, 530, 770. Tee-breakers, 530. Iee-scoops, 530. Idaho graves, 59. Images, wooden, 273. stone, Go3. Imitating, stories of Coyote's attempts at, 627, 
628, 632, 633, 739, 740. Imitation of animals, 579, 580. Implementmaker’s workshop, ancient, on San Juan Island, 382. Incised designs. See Engraving, under Orna- mentation. Incising, tools for, 474. Inheritance, among Lillooet, 255, 256. Insanity rare among Shuswap, 470. Tron adse, 204. artow-points, 134, 235, 519. blades, 134, 144, 174. files, 313. knives, 159, 204, 234, 316, 538, 785. rivets, 315. 
tools, 204, 474, 475. Tron, trade in, 783. Troquois Indians, appearance of, 468, 472. characteristics of, 472. foreign relations of, 454, 460, 468. habitat of, 451, 452, 468.

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL. 
Iroquois Indians, subsistence of, 524. trade of, in furs, 468. war of, 548. Ttcha Range, 782. Ivory carvings, 319. 
“Jacke” of an animal, 672. 
Jade, 203, 234, 473. Janeck, Louis O,, collection of, 418. Japancse baskets, 484. 
Jasper, 140, 203, 225. Jasper House, 451, 454, 455, 460. 
Jericho, shellheap at, 362. Jervis Inlet, tribes of, 195, 200. Tobnson, James, 135. Juan de Fuca, Strats of, 303. Judd collection, 308. Juniper (Juniperus occidentalis), 25. 
Kamswiiis, W. S, Traditions of the Quinault Indians, 77-132. 
Ka'kxa, 544-546. Kallelst, 635. Kamloops, B. C., 447, 467- chipped points from, 473. clubs from, 403. 
people of, 182, 455, 456, 461, 465, 466, 470. 
trading post at, 535. Kamloops Lake, fishing on, 525. hunting on, 455. Kanakas, country of in tale, 747. Ka'xa, Shuswap warrior, 555. 
Kelly Creek, 458, 450, 464. Kenpé'sket, a North Thompson chief, 467. See Kinbiskets. Kettles of Shuswap, 517. Kidnapping of boy by the owl (Chileotin myth), 
36, 37, 52 Kilts, 213. Kinbaskets, the, 455, 460, 462, 465, 467, 471, 524. King and Casey forest, 305. Kinnikinvic, 574, 575, 787. Kitchen-middens, 323. Klickitat basketry, 440, 483, 765. Klooshkis Lake, 763. “Knife people,” 202, Indians. Knives, carving, 190, 204, 318, 438. for cutting copper and soft stones, 203, 474. for cutting navelstring, 584. for cutting skin, 508. manufacture of, 166, 203, 314, 316, 763. war, 234, 538. See also Fish-Anives. 
  667. See Thompson 
  
  8o1 
Kauckle-cover for game of lehal, 785. Kootenai Indians, characteristics of, 472. foreign relations, 452, 455, 462, 542. 
habitat, 451, 467. 
language, 449. trade relations, 536. travel and transportation, 531. Koryak basket, 487. Kwakiutl Indians, burial customs of, 273. characteristics of, 667. foreign relations, 3, 760, 763. 
games of, 320. household “utensils and implements used by, 
163, 313, 318, 488. social organization of, 326. Kwelad'lst, 644. Kwo'mesken's Village, 459. 
Lavo, division of, 256, 257, 572, 573, 782. Labret, 191, 441. Lac la Hache, 454, 458, 459, 465. Ladder, house, decoration of, 213, 493, 576. La Fontaine, 461. Laing, Joho W., on petroglyph near Great Cen- tral Lake, 326. Lake division of the Shuswap, 454, 459, 460, 465, 466, 471. Language, Carrier, 450, 763. Chileotin, 450, 763. Chinook, 3, 202. Cree, 449, 455. Iroquois, 468. Kootenai, 449. Lillooet, 195, 200, 203, 254, 207, 451. Salish, 190, 195, 439. Shuswap, 454, 456, 460. 
Thompson, 195, 200. 
Lassoes, 534. Lazenby, Frederic T., explorations of, 57, 
59-61. . Legends, clan, of Lillooet, 257, 258. 
Leggings, 219, 502-504, 507, 508, 777. 
Lehal. See Games. Lendixteus, 788. Levirate, 255, 571, 591. whepasken and Lexhekst, story of, 755-757. Lice, gathering of, soo. Lichen, use of, for dye; 205. Lightning, beliefs regarding, 275, Goz. “mystery” of, 539. “Lightning"-wood arrows, 539. Lillooet Indians, the, 193-300. ancestors, 252-255, 258, 286. appearance, 302, 253.

----

802 
Lillooet Indians, art, 183, 427, 430, 438. 
‘basketry, 205, 206, 215, 216, 440, 477, 483, 
480, 765, 768, 774. buriakcustoms, 269-273. characteristics, 203, 471, 667. climate of country of, 196. clothing and ornament, 209, 217-223, 264, 265. customs regarding birth, 260, 261. festivals, 257-259. food, 222, 223. foreign relations, 232, 233, 247, 254, 441, 463, 469, 763. 
games and pastimes, 248-250. habitat, 5, 5, 195, 201. houses, 212-215, 494. hunting, 225, 256. 
language, 195, 200, 202, 254, 293, 451. 
manufactures, 203-212. marriage customs, 267-269, 284. migration, 200. 
‘mythology, 659, 747. ‘population, 199, 294. religion, 274-291. seasons, 224. sign language, 250, 251. social relations, 200, 252-358. subsistence, 223, 237. 
trade, 231-233, 504, 536. travel and transportation, 228-231, 531. tribal divisions, 195-198. tribal names, 195, 451. villages, 196-198. 
warlare 234-247, 455, 535, S40-54%, 555557 784. : Lillooet, town of, 195. Lillooet Valley, specimens from, 314, 342. Lithospermum angustsfolium Michx., used as red paint, 205. 
Lodges, girl) 263, 265, 295. lying-in, 295. R mat, 213, menstrual, 296. See also Duellings. Loom for weaving blanket, 212. 
Loon, stories of, 35, 36, 47, 48, 52, 54, 667, 668. Lopez Island, 63, 380, 381. Lower Fraser River. See Fraser River. Lummi Indian Reservation, 367, 368, 37%, 372. Lynx abundant in Shuswap country, 46. method of catching, 522, 523. story of the, 684. uses of, 218, 225. Lytton, B.C, art, 438. characteristics of people of, 471.   INDEX TO VOLUME IL. 
Lytton, B. C., nephrite from, 368. ‘pestles found at, 157, 158, 433 
MCCARDLE, Morris, finds on farm of, 306, 312= 
314, 317, 318, 322. McConnell, Ronald S., shell-beaps on farm of, 305, 308, 332. McDonald, Alexander, 56, 304, 449. Mackenzie, Alexander, on Carrier armor, 538. on Fraser River bow, 520. on the Sekanai, 548. on underground houses of Shuswap, 492. Mackenzie River birch-bark bucket, 487. ‘Magic, feats of, 286. stories of, 29, 30, 51, 80, 114-116, 131, 729~ 
735, 759, 751. Mamet Lake, 447. Mammals, stories of, 663, 663, 66g, 670. Manitou, 286, 586, 588-590. See Guardian spirits. Manufactures, of Chilcotin, 763-782. of Lillooet, 203-212. of Shuswap, 473-491. “Many-Roats,” 256. Map showing habitat of Lillooet tribe, 201. showing location of typical cairns, shell-heaps, and trenches in British Columbia and Wash- 
ington, opp. 56, 57. 
of San Juan group, showing location of cairns, 62. showing Shuswap territory, 45. of Upper Puget Sound, showing location of shell-heaps, 303. Maple, uses of, 321, 224. vine (deer circinatum), 225, 231, 
Marietta, Wash,, 303, 367-372. Marmots, story of Coyote, Fox, and the, 741, 742. Marmotskin mittens, 220. Marriage customs, 265-269, 206, 468, 571, 576, 
590-593. Marrow stored in bladders, 517. Marten and Fisher, stories of, 41, 53, 673-677. Mask carved out of soft coal, 434. Masks, beliefs regarding, 258. clan, representing ancestors or clan legend, 
253, 254, 257, 258, 283, 286. of crest groups, 578, 579, 58%. of Nootka Indians, 404. worn by pubescent girls, 264, 787. worn by shamans, 612-614, 616. Mason County, Wash., shell-heaps in, 401-403. Mat lodges, 213. masks, 612-614, 616. 
Mats, making of, 208, 209, 490, 774. miniature, made by pubescent girls, 587. 
 

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
Mats, of prehistoric people of Lower Fraser River, 188. 
uses of, 215, 493, 496, 516, 776. ‘Matsmoothers, 208, 360, 429. Mauls. See Hammers. Mayne Island, 417. Meat, curing of, 214, 227, 517. varieties of, used by Shuswap, 513. Medicine-bags, contents of, 603. Medicines, 584, 589, 618, 619. Mending, of basketry, 480. of canoes, 53:2. . Menstruating women, customs and regulations re- 
garding, 269, 296, 496, 587, 588, 592,673, 788. Menstruation, story regarding, 626, 627. Mental traits of Shuswap, 469. Meshsick, 775. Metchosen district, explorations in, 360. Mica and mica schist, 140. Micmac mythology, reference to, 8, &e. See Rand. Middlemen, 535. Midwives, 260, 295, $84. 
Migration, 7 199, 191, 439, 441, 466-469, 761, 
762. Milback Sound, 11. Milky Way, 597, 600. Miniature deer made of grass, 250, 269, 26s. images carved from sozpstone, 603. objects, making of, 264, 265, 587, 588. Missionaries, influence of, 46g, 612, 621, 789. Mississippi Valley, chipped implements from, 366. Mittens, 230, 222, 505. 
Moccasins, 219, 220, 222, 505, 506, 508, 535, 777. 
Monsters, the men and the (Chilcotin myth), 
43, 44, 54 Montana graves, 59. Months, Chilcotin names for, 781. Lillooet names for, 223, 224. Shuswap names for, 517, 515. Moon, beliefs regarding the, 275, 597, 70%, 735- stories of the, 653, 701, 702. Mooney, James, cited, 79. Moose, bones of, found in shellheaps of the Lower Fraser, 140. Morice, Father, cited, 4, 5, 7, 14 15, 30, 35, passin. rescarches of, 759, Mortars, decorated stone, 159, 182, 184-186, 
4247436, 433. paint, 177, 184, 185. stone, 140, 158, 159, 182, 184, 185, 188, 313, 
330, 340, 369, 380, 382, 425, 474, 590,776. 
wooden, 500. Mosquito and Thunder, story of, 709. 
    803 
Moss (dlectoria ochrolenia, vax. sarmentosa), 220. black (dlectoria jutata), 222, 515, 781. wolf, 764. Mould, vegetable, 137. Mounds in British Columbia and Washington, location of, opp. 6, 57. Mount Coffin, specimens from, 414. Mountain-goat, beliefs regarding the, 281. bones of, found in shell-heaps, 14%, 188. 
Mourners, 221, 503, 504. Mucus Stone, Little, story of, 707-709. Mud, use of, as dye, 476. 
Murder, 542, 543, 546. Murphine, Thomas, 56. Museums: American Museum of Natural History, New York, 135, 324, 440. British Museum, 440. Ferry Museum, Tacoma, Wash., 416. Field Museam of Natural History, Chicago, 324. Free Museum of Science and Axt, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 416. Natural History Museum of New Westminster, B.C, 135. Oregon Historical Society, Museum of, 4o1, 416. Peabody Museum, Cambridge, Mass., 44, 
485, 486. Provincial Museum, Victoria, B. 158, 308, 340, 417. Smithsonian Institution, 486. U. S. National Museum, 431, 485, 487. Mushrooms, 515. Muskeg, spirit of, 661. Muskrats, stories of, 657, 679-681. Musquiam, Tndian reserve at, 186. shellheaps at, 140, 361. Musquiam Indians, sacrificial dish of, 429, 430. Mussel-shells, 136, 139. Mysteries, land and water, 276. 
“Mystery,” 586, 587, 590, 619. parts of animals, 280, 592. songs, 610. 
Mythological beings, 279, 595-597 Mythology, Athapascan, 4, So. Bella Coola, 5-7. Cartier, 4, 5, 14 tin, 1-54, 786, 788. Chinook, 7, 8, 81. Lillooet, 659, 747. Quinault, 77-132. Shuswap, 621-758. 
  56, 135, 
  NACOONTLOON LAKE, 760-763, 774, 776. Nacoontloon village, 787.

----

804 INDEX TO 
Name, of Chilcotin tribe, 759. of Lillooet tribe, 292, 453. of Shuswap tribe, 449. Names, Lillooet, 255, 258, 204, 295. Shuswap, 452, 570, S71, 582. Naming-ceremonies, 258, 250, 571. Nanaimo, explorations of shellheap at, 323, 324. 
petroglyphs near, 434. 
Nanoose, “cairns of earth” at, 57. Napoleon, an Indian of Skookum Chuck, 289. Navel string, 260, 261, 584. Neah Bay, 416. Nechaco River, 784. Necklaces, 220, 221, 257, 509, 778+ Needle-cases of elk-antier, 490. Needles, 141, 169, 170, 172, 173, 188, 205, 208, 
387, 434) 474 415, 417, 490. Negroes, 452, 741, 763. Nephrite, 145, 363. Netting used on snowshoes, 534, 535- Netting needles, 490, 491- Nets. See Fishnets. Netsiokers. See Sinkers. 
Newbigging collection, 330, 335, 336, 338, 339, 
341, 344. Newcombe, Charles F., 181, 304, 324, 326. cairns examined by, 6, 58. on Deep Bay trench, 323. New Dungeness, 303, 386-390. New Westminster, B. C., museum at, destroyed by fire, 135. New Whatcom, Wash,, grooved stone from, 367. New Zealand, resemblance of clubs from, to those of Vancouver Island, 403. Nez Perces type of woven bark-string bag, 498. Nicknames, 253, 294, 295. Nicola Valley graves, 59- Nicola Similkameen region, small tribe of, 762. Night and day, story of origin of, 625, 626, 738. Nisqually Indians, stone club from, 414. Noblemen, 576, sot, 786. Nooksack River, Washington, 140, 368. Nooses, 522, 523. J Nootka Indians, 04. North Bay, San Juan Island, cairs at, 63. North Cafion band of Shuswap, 459, 464. North Pacific coast, archeological investigations 
on, 304, 305. art of, 183, 330, 420, 426, 429, 438, 440. North Saanich, art of, 438. description of caims at, 57, 63-67. 
explorations at, 56, 57, 304, 331. 
obsidian from, 379. pipe from, 181. VOLUME IL, 
North Saanich, skeletons from, 56, 435. North ‘Thompson region, people of, 454, 460, 
471. See Thompson Indians. Northwest Company, establishment of trading: posts by, in Carrier country, 535. Nose-ornaments, 220, 510, 778. Number, sacred, of Lillooet, 201. of Shuswap, 603. Nuts, 223, 223, 515. 
OBSIDIAN, uses of, 203, 225, 379, 381, 439, 763 Ochre, red, occurrence of, in shellheaps, 149, 
177, 374, 378. Ojibwa baskets, 485. Okanagon Indians, basketry of, 477. characteristics of, 472, 667. 
forcign relations, 469, 494, 498, 504, 533, 536. games of, 249. 
habitat, 451, 455. travel and exploration, 447, 531. tribal names of, 195, 452. 
wars of, 540, 542. “Old Man” of the Lillooet, 274, 284. Sec Chief of the dead, Oli-One. Old-One, characteristics and description of, 595- 
7. chi of the dead, Gog, G12, 789. See “Old Man.” stories of, 621, 642-644, 746-748. transformer, 631, 713. Oliver, William, 135, 145, 167, 173. Olympia, Wash., celt and stonc clubs from, 401, 
14. Omens and beliefs, Shuswap, G19, Gao. Orcas Island, Wash, 380, 429. Oregon, Athapascan tribes of, 8o. axes from, 418. baskets from, 484. clubs from, 415. Oregon Historical Society, Portland, 366. Orion, myth relating to, 31. Omamentation. designs in: R arrangement of, 133, 206, 207, 765, 767, 770. geometric, 352, 171, 181-183, 195, 207, 320, 
334) 353, 353, 413, 437, 434 438, 439, 478, 380, 489, 767-769, 781. interpretation of, 520, 766-773. 
patterns, 208-300, 480, 484, 488, 512, 51, 520, 764, 766-160, 775, 778, 179, 787 pictographic, 412, 478, 764. realise, 176, 18%, 183-187, 191, 234, 259, 
320, 321, 412, 416, 418-420, 424, 429, 440, 480, 436, 489, 493, 774, 787.  

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL. 805 
Omamentation. on objects: 
of bark, 775. 
of basketry, 206, 478-485, 764-774. of bone, hom, or ivory, 152, £71, 181-183, 
220, 264, 320, 321, 334, 353) 354 378, 404-412, 510, 781. of clothing, 218-220, 502-505, 508, 500, 
535, 543, 777: of metal, 413. 
of skin or cloth, 225, 234, 499, 535, 775 
of stone, 176, 181, 182, 134, 185, 353, 378, 
412-432, 786. 
of wood, 213, 224, 225, 272 492, 518-520, 538, 576, 778. technique of: basketry-work, 205-207, 480. 
‘beads, 220, 502, 503, 509, 520. 
carving, 181, 184, 185, 250, 272, 320, 321, 
494-411, 416, 418-432, 575, 576, 787. 
dentalia, 219, 220, 505, 506, 598, 510, 777. 
dyeing, 206, 478, 479, 482-484, 486, 487, 
489, 502, 504, 505, 508, 500, 518, 535, 
538, 764, 775, 777. 
embroidery, 499, $99. engraving, I52, 171, 181-183, 220,234, 329, 
353, 354, 378, 412, 413, 434, 438, 478, 
480, 510, 764, 778, 781, 786. 
feathers, 505, 506, 508, 520, 538. 
fringes, 219, 220, 500, 503, 503, 507-508, 777 
‘hair, 478, 479, 509, 535: 538. 
imbrication, 205, 206, 440, 483, 484, 765, 
767-778. intaglio, £76, 353. 
overlaying, 483, 485, 764. 
painting, 181, 218, 234, 350, 475, 476, 504, 
507, 508, 519, 520, 576. pinking, 220. 
quillwork, 235, S03, 503, 595, 598, 509, 
518, 764, 777- tassels, 506, 509, 535, 777- 
tattooing, 298-300, SIT, 512, 778, 779. 
teeth, 248, 506, 508. tubes, so. . twining, 775. 
weaving, 483, 484, 772. . 
Ornaments, personal, 56, 176, 178, 320, 264, 
319, 349,.350) 509-512, 579, 777, 778. 
Orphans, customs regarding, 281, 593. Osteological material in Provincial Museum, Vie- toria, 56. Otter, 141, 665. 
"story of, 689, 690. 
Ovens, earth, 516.   Owl clan of Lillooet, 253, 253. Owls, stories of, 36, 37, 52, 122-124, 132, 634, 
695, 696, GgB—or. Oxen, 230. 
Oyster-shells, 136, 355, 394. 
PanpLES, 230, 532. Paint-brushes, 476. Paintdishes, 177, 184, 185, 474, 500. Painting, art of, well developed in Fraser River 
Delta, 133. of animals, 615. of bows and arrows, 224, 519, 520. of clothing, 220. 
of face or body, 543, 578, 579, 588, 589, 605. See Face-painting. of hair, 253. of ladder, 92. on rocks and trees, 282. See also Rack painting. See also Ornamentation, technique of. Paints, varieties and uses of, 8, 204, 205, 224, 
235, 264, 475, 476, 778. See also Dyes. 
Paramour, story of a woman and her, 724, 735. Parfliches, 534. Parsons Bridge, near Victoria, 56, 58. Paul, Captain, 292, 297, 298. 
Pavilion band of Shuswap, 461, 465. Pavilion Lake, in Marble Caion, 753. Pavillion Creek, 195. “Paying” ceremony, 270, 27%. Peace, tokens of, 235. Pedder Bay, 360. Pelicans, story of the woman and the, 657. 
Pemberton Estate, near McNeil Bay, cairms on, 58. Pemberton Meadows, 252. Pendants. See Ornaments, personal. Penn Cove, shell-heaps on, 378, 379. Perforated stones, 154, 155, 337, 338+ 
Pestles, of Lillooet, 203, 217. types of, from Lower Fraser River shell-heaps, 140, 156-156, 188. types of Shuswap, 473, 599, S01. 
typical forms of Vancouver Island, 364, 365, 
433 with bat shaped tops, from shell-heaps of British Columbia and Washington, 351, 312, 323, 
359, 368, 369, 303. 
with two striking-heads, from shellheaps of 
British Columbia and Washington, 338, 339, 
374, 392. Petitot, E, cited, 7, 11, 29, 35, 45, 50. 
Petroglyphs, opp. 56, 324-330. Philanthropy of Shuswap, 574. 
Pictographs, 265, 298, 764.

----

806 
Pierce, Thurston, and Mason Counties, Wash., location of shell-neaps in, 401-403. Pike, G., 181, 330. Pillows of Shuswap, 496. 
Pinking. See Ornamentation. Pipes, ceremonial, 282, 603. description of, 250, 470, 75. distribution of, 190. 
ornamented, 181, 184, 185, 575, 786, 787. 
from shell-heaps, 140, 180, 181, 184, 185, 330, 
350-352, 437, 439, 470. Pits, burial, 59, 360, 362. Pitt Meadows, 136. Plants, used as medicines by Shuswap, 618. use of, as charms, 619. varieties of food, 780, 781. Point Agate, 303. Point Gray, 140, 361, 362. Point Grief, 361. Point Roberts, Wash, 7, 59, 61, 303, 362-364. Poisoned arrows, 335, 539. Poisons, 61g. Pole River, 227, 252. 
Polygamy, 269, 592. Polynesian Islands, culture of, 403. 
Ponchos, 219, 220, 503, 507, 777 Pope, Bob, informant on Quinault traditions, 79. Poplar, uses of, 216, 22. Population, Chilcotin, 760, 761. 
Lillooet, 199, 204. Shuswap, 463-466. Porcupine quills, 220. 
Porcupines, stories of, 40, 53, 654, 655, 658, 659, 
710, 711, 748, 749. Port Angeles, cairns reported at, 58. Port Hammond, burialmounds and shell-heaps 
at, 57, 60, 134-173, 174-178, 180-182, 184 187, 332, 361, 379. Port Madison, shell-heap at, 303. Port Susan, shell-heaps at, 373. Port Williams, eaith-work near, 363, 390. shellheaps near, 390-393, 439- Potatoes, 761. “Potato patches,” Indian, 307, 312, 316, 321. 
Potlatches, 254, 255, 258, 469, 535, 574, 578, 
579, $82, 583, 786. Pottery, absence of, 161, 433, 434, 475. Powder horns, 520. Prayers, of Chileotin, 78. of Lillooet, 260, 264-267, 271, 279-281. and observances, of Shuswap, 587, 601-603. Pregoancy, beliefs and customs regarding, 260, 584, Goz. Presents, giving of, 236, 258-260, 271, 205. 
      INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
‘Preserving roots and fruits, methods of, $16, 780. Prickly pear, use of, 205. Prisoners of war, treatment of, 547. Property, rights regarding, 255, 256, 269, 572, 
573, 582. ‘Property.marks on baskets, 774. ‘Prophets, Goo, Gos, 617. Puberty, customs regarding, 263-267, 205, 206, 587-590, 6ot, 603, 787, 788. Puget Sound and Gulf of Georgia, archeology of, 301-441. Puntzee Lake, 3, 760-763. Puyallup, near Tacoma, Wash, 399. 
QuAMICHAY, clubs from, 184, 416. 
Quarrels, 236, 558-563. Quartz, 203, 235, 307. Quartzite, 140, 368. Queen Charlotte Islands, 353. Quesnel, Carrier Indians of, 549. Quill-work, 220, 480, 483, 764. tation. Quinault Indians, art of, 440. characteristics and culture of, 79. dwellings of, 94. mythology of, 77-132. Quinault River, 79. Quivers, 225, 570, 521, 782.   
See Ornamen- 
RADBIT-ARROWS, 782. Rabbits, 218, 460, 633, 782. See Hare. Raccoon, bones of, found in shell-heaps of the Lower Fraser, 141. Rafts, 228, 230, 525, 532, 783 Rain, beliefs regarding, 595, 596, 598, 601. See Weather. Rainbow, beliefs regarding, 507. Rainbow Trout clan of Lillooet, 252, 253. Rainfall, 760. Rand, cited, 8, 18, 21, 26, 31, 36. Rank, division of Shuswap according to, 576. Raspberries (Rubus sp.), 222. Rattle, child's basket-work, 257. use of, at dances, 578, 580, 787. use of, by pubescent youth, 264, 590. use of, by shamans, 78g. Rattlesnake poison, use of, for Wararows, 235. Raven, as guardian spirit, 283. ‘beliefs regarding, 281. mythical being, 5, 738, 789. stories of the, 14-19, 48, 49, 80, 109-117, 130. Raven clan of Chilcotin, 786. Red.Cap, 726-720. Redstone Flats, Chilcotin reserve at, 762, 774.

----

INDEX TO VOLUME II. 
Red-Nose and the woodpeckers, story of, 659-662. Red“Trees Reserve, 447, 454. Religion, of Chilcotin, 758, 789. of Lillooet, 274-201. of Shuswap, 595-617. of Thompson, 282, 469, 595, 603 Revenge, blood, 236,237, 543, 557-561, 579, 577. 
Rhubarb, wild (Heracleum lanatum), S15. Richardson, James, cited, 356. on archeological remains of Puget Sound re- 
gion, 304. on explorations in Deep Bay, 323. one of the first to open cairns, 56. Rickreall Valley, 416. Ridicule among Lillooet, 258, 2632, 266. Riggs, 8. R, cited, 31. Rings, 221. 
Risky Creck, 3, 459, 461, 464, 508, 760, 762. Rivets, iron, 315. Robb, W. K, 304-306, 321. Robes, 504, 777. See Ponchos. 
Rock-paintings, 275, 282, 599, 59%, 789. 
Rocks, beliefs regarding, 274. Rocky Mountains, Indians of, 454, 455. Rocky Point, 58, 360, 361. 
Root diggers, 233, 475, 513, 514, 780. Roots, digging of, 227, 256, 587, 780. ‘method of preparing and preserving, 516, 517. varieties of, 222, 514, 780, 781. Rope, material used in making, 212. Rose berries (Rosa gymnocarpa Nutt), 222. Runners, training of, 589. Runways, canoe, 433. 
Saamc PeNNsuLA, caims and shellheaps on, 
56, 330-355, 436 culture of, influenced by that of Lower Fraser 
Valley, 19, 355. specimens from, 314, 342, 343, 417, 422. Sacrificial dishes, 429, 430. Saddle blankets, 534. Saddles, 533, 534. Sage-bark, uses of, 209, 218, Sahapin, the, 453, 498. Salish languages, distribution of, 190, 195, 439. stock, branches of, 79, 449. Salmon, as article of food, 79, 14%, 513, 517. as bait for catching eagles, 523. first, of season, 380, 381, 297, 602. ‘methods of catching, 227, 524, 779 preparation and curing of, 517. stories of, 18, 19, 24-26, 49, 50, 111,112,130, 131, 637, 656, 60, 69%, 743. 
trade in, 232, 535-537-   807 
Salmon berry stalks, used as food, 222. Salmon fisheries, 227, 524, 525, 547. Salmon fishing on Chilcotin River, 3. Salmon-heads, method of cooking, in olden times, 86. Salmon-oil, use of, 205, 221. Salmon River, 762. Salmon-weirs, 228, 524. Salt Spring Island, cairns and shellheaps on, 
58, 330. Sandals, 219, 507. San de Fuca, Wash, shell-heap near, 378. Sand Point, Idaho, type of club from, 414. Sandstone found in shellheaps, 140, 158, 313, 
314, 375. implements made of, 203. San Juan de Fuca, Straits of, cairns and shell- heaps near, 58, 303. San Juan Group, description of caims on, 5, 57, 61-63, 434, 435. description of shell heaps on, 304, 380-386. stone sculpture from, 424. reconnaissance of, by Thacker, 6, 303. Sapscrapers, 223, 515, 516, 780, 78%. Sarcee Indians, 451. Savona, 447, 461. Scaffolds, 214, 215, 495, 530, 776. 
Scalps and scalping, 235, 550, 610, 667. Scott, James, 144, 181. Scrapers, 141, 475. 
Scrcheny 64, 511, 588, 589, 788. Sculptures, from Cowichan Valley and Fraser River Delta, 420-438. from Lower Fraser River, 159, 181-188, 428, 
439. from. Saanich Peninsula, 346, 353 354 4271 424, 425. from Washington, 393, 420-432. See also Carvings and Ornamentation. 
Sea Island, shell-heaps on, 139, 362. Sea-mammals hunted by prehistoric people of Fraser River region, 188. Seal, bones of, found in shell-heaps of the Lower ‘Fraser, 140, Seal, as guardian spirit, 283. Seasons, beliefs regarding the, 595. of the Lillooet, 223, 224. of the Shuswap, 517, 518. stories of origin of, 596, 615, 626, 738. Seaton Lake, people of, 105, 253-254. rock paintings, 282. Seattle, Wash., sculpture from, 432. Sechelr, the, of Jervis Inlet, 200. See Sapcrapers, Skin-

----

808 INDEX TO 
Secret societies, 286. Sekanai Indians, basketry of, 489. characteristics of, 472. Father Morice on, 774. foreign relations, 460. 
habitat, 451. 
wars of, 524, 525, 541, 543, 546-549. Set, reservation near town of Lillooet, 252-254. SEPT, story of, 124, 125, 132. Sequim Bay, graves covered with huts near, 
300. Serpentine found in shellheaps, 140. uses of, 203. Service berries (Amelanchicr alnifolia Nutt), 222, 225, 227, 231. Seven Heads and Sna'naz, story of, 753-755. Sewing, of baskets, 477-482, 485. of canoes, 486, 531. implements used in, 508. Sewing, practise of, by pubescent girls, 587. Sexual relations, regulations regarding, 590. Shadow ascending mountains, 597. Shaker religion, influence of, on Quinault, 79. 
Shamanism, 278, 279, 287-200, 469, 592, 600, 612-618, 780. ‘Shamans, face-painting of, Gor. funerary, 296. guardian spirits of, 283, 607. as leaders of war parties, 542, 543. length of time of training for, 265. necklaces of, 321, 509. smoking practised by, 250. Sheep, bighom, story of, 656, G7. Shel, objects of, found in shell-heaps, 134, 137, 140, 176. Shell-heaps, cairns near, 56-60, 63, 434, 435. of Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound, 303-324, 330-403. general conclusions from exploration of, 
433-441. of Lower Fraser River, 133—187. general summary of investigations of, 187~ 91. reference to preliminary reports of explora- tions of, 136. maps showing location of, 56, 303, 401-403. 
Shells, species of, 307, 319, 33% 341, 345, 357, 363, 364, 368, 373, 374 378, 387, 394, 395. See abelone, Dentalia, Haliotis. Shields, war, 538. Shirts, 502, 777. Shoalwater Bay, 440. Shoes, 219, 505, 596. Shot pouches, 570. VOLUME IL 
Shredding implements of prehistoric people of Fraser River region, 188. Shuswap Indians, the, 443-758. ancestors of, 460, 570, 597. appearance of, 471. 
basketry of, 477-490, 496-498, Sot, 764, 765. birth, childhood, puberty, marriage, death, 571, 
584-504. characteristics of, 469-473, 570, 763. clothing and ornaments, 503-513, 524, 588-590. 
country of, 436, 457. diseases among, 463. 
dwellings of, 457, 458, 460, 479, 492-496. foreign relations, 3, 202, 451, 460, 466-469, 
534 537, 575, 581, 595, 621, 729, 748, 760, 762, 763, 783, 784, 786. games and pastimes of, 249, 564-566. habitat of, 451. hunting grounds of, 256, 460. 
language of, 195, 451, 452. list of bands and villages of, 457-462. ‘manufactures of, 473-491, 764. medicine, charms, current beliefs, 618-620. mythology, 5, 621-758. names, 255, 253. ‘population, 463-466. religion, 595-617. seasons, 517, 518. sign language, 567, 568. social relations, 284, 524, 571. social organization and festivals, 569-583. subsistence of, 460, 513-530. 
trade, 535-537. travel and transportation, 460, 531-535. tribal boundaries of, 462, 463. tribal divisions, 452-456, 461, 462, 465, 466, 
470, 471. tribal name, 195, 449, 450- 
wars of, 237-240, 524, 535, 538-563. Shuswap Lake, 435- Siberian baskets, 485-487. Sickness, beliefs regarding, 657. methods of treating, 287, 612-616, 618. Sidney, cairns at, 57. shell-heaps near, 181, 331. specimens from, 337, 339. 
Sign language, 250, 251, 567, 568, 785, 786. Silver buttons, 220. Similkameen, characteristics of people of, 472. Singing, drum used to accompany, 75, “Singing women,” 606. 
Sinkers, 154, 155, 311, 337, 338, 358, 364, 367, 
372, 393, 525. Sisiu'lax, George, informant, 447.  

----

INDEX TO VOLUME II, 
Sisters, two, adventures of, 28, 29, 51. and the stars, 31, 32, 51. Sixwillexken, 447, 605, 607, 615, 621, 622. Skagit River shell heaps, 187, 332, 372 435, 436. Skeletons, description of, from Comox, 321-323. description of, from Saanich Peninsula, 355. finding of, in shell-heaps of Fraser Delta, 191, 435. occurrence of, in cairns, 55, 367, 373- occurrence of, in pits, 61, 362. occurrence of, in shellheaps, 134, 136, 137, 139, 187, 191, 354, 378, 384, 435, 436, 441. 
position of, 55, 60, 134, 186, 322, 373. 
types of, 134, 139. See also Burial, Cairn-burials, Cairns, Shell heaps. Skins, preparation of, 169, 188, 205, 476, 477, 764. uses of, 496, 508. Skinscrapers, 143, 162, 169, 170, 203, 316, 476, 
417, 764. Skookum Chuck, shaman from, 289. Skookum Chuck Rapids, 227. Skulls, human, showing deformation, 60, 381, 382, 384. types oi, from cairns in British Columbia and Washington, 61, 64, 6s. types of, found in shell heaps, 186, 188-190, 
436, 437. with oles crushed in them, 176. See also Cairn-burials, Cairns, Crania, Shell heaps. Skunks, stories of, 677, 678, 748-750, 752, 753- Sky, stories of ascent 0, 80, 107-109, 130. Sky people, story of war with, 749. Slate, chipped object of, 332, 333. clubshaped specimen, 367. fish-knives, 140, 159, 204, 315, 316. 
points, 144, 160, 167, 308, 333, 334 35, 358, 380. tablet, perforated, 309. Slavekillers, 16, 174, 175, 348, 416. Slaves, cutting of hair of, 221, 543, 570. 
rank of, 570, 576, 582, 786. 
taking of, in war, 236, 543, 547, 548, 551. trade in, 233, 469, 36. treatment of, 548, 592, 763. Stow-matches, 217, ox. ‘Small-por, among Chilcotin, 761, 784. 
among Shuswap, 457-459, 463, 469, 542, 761. Smith, Harlan L, Archeology of the Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound, 301-441. Caims of British Columbia and Washington, 
55775: collections of, 473.   809 
Smith, Harlan 1, Shell-Heaps of the Lower Fraser River, British Columbia, 133-191. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 135. Smoke holes, 214. Smoking, custom of, 250, 284, 285, 574, 575, 
603, 786, 787. legend regarding, 181. taboo for pubescent youth, 590. “Smoking man,” 607. 
Sna'naz, stories of, 702-707, 753-755 Snares for catching animals, $23, 524 782. See Traps. Snow, story of Coyote shut in by, 744, 745. Snowfall, 456, 760. 
Snowshoes, 230, 231, 292, 533-535, 589, 783. Snow-shovels, 475. Soap, 512. Soap-berries (Shepherdia canadensis Nutt), 222, 262. Social organization, of Chilcotin, 786, 787. of Coast Salish, 254. of Fraser River Delta tribes, 254, 206. of Kwakiutl, 326. of Lillooet, 252-257, 296. of Shuswap, 569-583. of Thompson, 252-255. Socks, 218, sos. 
Soda Creck people, 457, 464, 549. Sodomy, (267), 747. 
Solstices, summer and winter, ceremonials at time of, 284. 
Songs, 257, 258, 285, 578-581, 583, 610. 
Souls, 263, 276-279, 286, 287, 600, Gos, 60s, 611, 613, 783. South Cafion band of Shuswap, 459, 464. South Thompson band. of Shuswap, 466. South Wellington Mine, near Nanaimo, celtlike object from, 324. Spallumcheen, Indians of, 447, 462, 466. Spallumcheen River, 455. 
Speakers, 258, 259. Spearing, methods of, 228. Spearman and his friends, adventures of, 116- 11, 130. Spearbeads, See Arrowheads Spears, beaver, 226, 523. deer, sar. war, 234, 538. 
Spider, stories of, 639, 690, 756. Spindles, 211. Spiritland, Chilcotin belief regarding, 788. 
Spirits, beliefs regarding, 598, 599- Spoons, 216, 500, 501, 777. 
Sproat Lake, petroglyph from, 326, 320.

----

810 
Sprott, J., collector, 135. Spruce-bark, uses of, 205, 216, 489, $3. 
Spruce.root, uses of, 205, 477, 478, 764, 765. Spuzzum, B. C, copper club from, 412-414. intermarriages with people of, 200. Squamish Indians, 236, 289, 296. Squamish River, 195. Squirrel, uses of, 218, 219. Squirrelarrows, 782. Stanley Park, Vancouver, 140, 361. Stanwood, Wash,, shell heaps at, 373-378. Stars, beliefs regarding, 275, 597, 785. names of, 597. 
stories of, 31, 32, 51, 726, 727, 749: Stave River, 361. Steatite, cutting of, 203. fragments of, found in shell-heaps at Port Ham- ‘mond, 140. 
uses of, 474. Steilacoom, near Tacoma, Wash., exploration of shellheap at, 400, 401. Stick or Upper Chilcotin, 760. Sticks, bodies disembowelled. stuck up on, 237, 
245. Stlaguumish Delta shell heaps, 187. 
Stilaguarish River, 332, 373, 435, 436. Stirrers, 160, 161, 217, 318, S01. 
Stirrups, 534. Stone arrow or spear points, 134, 141-144, 225, 
333, 334 473, 519: carvings, 166, 184-186, 188, 380, 420-432. dishes, 158, 159, 182, 184, 185, 204, 261, 353, 
420-424. implements, 139, 156, 157, 163-165, 175, 176, 188, 204, 234, 313, 366, 38%, 412-420, 473, 414. objets found in cairns or shell-heaps, 56, 140, 
163, 370, 324, 362, 312 380. pipes, decorated, 181, 184, 185, 786. Stone, work in, 190, 203, 204, 439, 475- “Stone Chilcotin’ or “Stonies,” basketry of, 774. characteristics of, 472, 778. dwellings of, 776. foreign relations, 467, 469, 542. habitat, 3, 45, 462, 463, 760-762. Shuswap name for, 452. subsistence, 524. trade relations, 536. Stones, burned and crackled, found in shell-heaps, 
137, 138, 311. 
perforated, 154, 155, 331, 338. Stool, weaver's, 212. Storage places for food, 223, 776. See Caciies. Stories, relating of, among Shuswap, 617, 621. 
    INDEX TO VOLUME IL. 
Subsistence, means of, among Chilcotin, 779-782. among Lillooet, 232, 227. Subsistence, among Shuswap, 513-530. Suicide, 203, 470. Suitors, stories of, 755-757. Sumas, Wash., 430. Sun, beliefs regarding, 275, 597. story of origin of, 738. Sun-dogs, 27: Supernatural aid received by gambler (Chilcotin myth), 38, 53. Swan noted for goodness and wisdom, 658, 671. Swan clan of Lillooet, 252, 253. Swan-quils, 220. Swans, story of Coyote and the, 638. Sweat bathing, 283, 283. Sweathouse, spirit of, 282, 643. story of Old-One and the, 642, 643. Sweat houses; of Chilcotin, 776. of Lillooet, 215, 266, 267, 282, 283. of Shuswap, 588, 589. Sword imported by Hudson Bay Co., 754. 
    TABOOS regarding births, 260, 261. regarding death and burial, 270, regarding marriage, 296. regarding menstruating women, 269, 281, 592. regarding mourners, 270, 593. regarding orphans, 281. regarding pregnant women, 584. regarding widows or widowers, 281, 297, 593. Tacoma, Wash, natural mounds south of, 7. Tahu'tlhutxen, 543-545. Teele'sket, 615, 616. Tampico, Wash., 438. Target practice, Government, 305. Tatlah Lake, 3, 33, 760-762. Tattooing, among Chilcotin, 778, 779, 785. among Lillooet, 221, 222, 298-300. among Shuswap, 511, 512. Tattoomarks, representation of, on rock-painting, 
sot. Tea, 515. Teeth, found in shell-heaps, 140. use of, in decoration of clothing, 220. Tet, James, cited, 5-12, passim. Notes on the Chilcotin Indians, 759-789. The Lillooet Indians, 193-300. The Shuswap, 443-789. Téte Jaune Cache, 451, 465. Thacker, William H., on the archeology of the San Juan Group, 56, 61-63, 303, 304, 380. Thimble-berry stalks as article of food, 222. “Thompson bands of Shuswap, 465, 466.

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
‘Thompson Indians, art of, 183, 438. 
basketry of, 469, 477, 478, 483, 489, 507, 
765, 774. Thompson Indians, characteristics of, 471, 667. clothing of, 507 (footnote 4). division of labor among, 256. 
dwellings of, 492-495. foreign relations, 195, 20, 469, 570. 
games, 249. habitat, 451. hairdressing of, 5t1. industries of, 469, 774. language, 195, 200, ‘manufactures, 166, 203, 314, 764. 
method of carrying game, 533. mythology, 5-9, 647, 651, 674, 676,684,685, 741. * names, 255. 
religion, 282, 469, 595, 603. 
sign language, 567, 658. social organization of, 252-255. social relations, 284, 470. trade relations, 533, 536, 537- travel and transportation, 467, 531. tribal names of, 253, 451, 452, 667. wars of, 240-246, 540-543, 546, 556. Thompson River, fishing on, 525. objects found in shell-heaps on, 316, 317, 320. tribes of, 447, 451. Thread or twine, manufacture of, 212, 477, 490, 
491, 587, 775. Three Stones (Kalla'lst), story of, 622, 623. “Thunder arrowheads,” 519, 539 Thunder, beliefs regarding, 114, 507, 508, 788. image of, carved or painted on sticks used at “letting-down’” feast, 259. stories regarding, 26-28, 50, 5%, 113, 114, 131, 
790, 727, 731. ‘Thunder-bird, 275, 597. | Thurston county, Wash. shell-heaps in, 401-403. Tinder, sor. Tillamook Indians, mythology, 21 (footnote). 
‘Tlee'sa, story of, 644-651. 
Toba Inlet, tribes of, 195, 236, 237. 
Tobacco, 250, 449, 574, 575, 786, 787. ‘mortars for grinding, 500. “Tobacco-pouches, 250, 499, 500. decoration of, 509. 
Toggles, 221, 319, 429, 520. Tomahawks, 203, 538, 54°. Tongs, 217, sot. Toozeys, the, 760-762. Torches, Shuswap, sor. Totemism, 268. Totem-poles, 217, 256, 272, 273, 7817. 
  811 
Totems, clan, 213, 283, 300. Totentrees, 256. ‘Trade, of Chilcotin, 761, 770, 783, 784. intertribal, 435. of Iroquois, 468. of Lillooet, 231-233. 
of Shuswap, 507-509, 535-537 
of Thompson, 533, 536, 537- Trade routes, 784. Traditions of the Chileotin Indians, 1-54. of the Quinault Indians, 77-132. of the Shuswap, 621-758. Trails and_trail-routes, Lillooet, common pro- perty, 256. . Training ceremonials, 265, 266,"587-590. ‘Trance, account of aged Shuswap woman who fell into a, 604, 60s. “Transformations, stories of, 653-659. Transformers, beliefs regarding, 274, 595, 596, 613, 623, 788. tales regarding, 4, 7, 80, 81, 622-652. Transportation, bag used for, 499. 
of goods, 532, 533, 783. See Travel and transportation. Trap, 140, 142. black stone resembling, 332. Trapping, 18. Traps, for catching animals, 226, 227, 522-524, 
782. for catching fish, 237, 228, 527-539. Travel and transportation, methods of, 188, 434, 
535, 782, 783. Tree burial, 436. Trees, carvings on bark of, 283, 789. method of felling, among Chilcotin, 764. totem, 256. varieties of, used by Shuswap, 515. Tree-top, abandonment of young wife in (Qui- nault myth), 121, 122, 131, 132. Trenches in Britisch Columbia and Washington, 
opp. 56, 57, 367, 385, 386. 
Tribes, story of the war of the, or of the four quarters, 641, 642. Trolling lines, 52s. ‘Trousers, 503, 777. Tsimshian tribes of Skeena River, 786. Tuberculosis among Shuswap, 463. Tubes, bone, 155, 180, 348. Tule mats, 208. 
‘Tumplines, 230, 498, 532, 533, 783. incident regarding, 699. Turn Island, cairn on, 63. Turtleback Mountain, Orcas Island, specimen from, 381.  

----

812 
Tweezers, 231, 511, 778. Twine, material used in making, 212, 491. See Thread. Twins, beliefs regarding, 263, 620. burial of, 273. cradles for, 586. customs and regulations regarding, 263, 586, 
587, 689.   
UnpERGROUND house as place of refuge in war, 236. See Dullings. Upper Bridge River, s41. Upper Lillooet River, 195. Urine, uses of, 221, Sx, s12. Utensils, household, of Chilcotin, 776, 777. Utsalady, Camano Island, houses of, 373. celthafts from, 314, 344, 377 
VALUES, trade, 233. Vancouver Island, art on, 1g. method of burial on, 441. 
cairns on, 55, 434. chipped points of frequent occurrence on, 1go. clubs from, 403, 416. mortars from, 369. shell-heaps of, 135, 140, 187, 361, 362. method of weaving blankets on, 10. Victoria, B. C., caims near, 56, 58-60, 67-74. caivings from, 427. earth-work near, 303. shell-heaps at and near, 355-360. Victoria Natural History Society, 56, 58. Villages, Lillooet, 292, 393. of prehistoric peoples of Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound. of Shuswap, 457-462. Village sites, ancient, 330. Von den Steinen, Karl, cairs examined by, 56, 58. 
WavL-coveRiNG, Lillooet, 215. Wallup, 764. 
Walking-sticks, 535, 783. Wampum, 509. “Wanderer” element in mythology, 4, 5, 7. Wapato Island, sculpture from, 432. ‘War, weapons of, 174, 175, 225, 366, 666, 782. 
decorated, 175, 176, 184. 
Warchiefs, 542, 543, 55%, 555+ ‘Wardances, 61x. 
Wasfare, of Carrier, 541, 549, 784. of Chilcotin, 3, 784. 785. of Lillooet, 234-247 of tribes on Lower Fraser River, 236. of people of Puget Sound region, 348, 349.   INDEX TO VOLUME II 
Warfare, of Sekanai, 524, 525, 541, 542, 546-549. 
of Shuswap, 3, 538-563. 
of Thompson, 240-246, 540-542, 546, 556. 
‘Warriors, burial or cremation of, 543, 554, 592. customs of, 235, 543, 504 610, 611. face-painting of, 235, 698, 78. guardian spirits of, 283, 607. head-bands of, sos. style of hairdressing of, 221, 510, S11, 543. training of, 589, 590. Warm’ Springs, 227. ‘Washington, art of prehistoric peoples of, 352, 353. basketry of west coast of, 440. clubs from, 415. Quinault reservation in, 79. Water-basket, 496. Water Mystery, story of the woman and the, 
725, 726. ‘Water-Ouzeland the Grisly Bears,story of, 750,751. Watson Bar Creek, 762. Wa'xaselp (Philadelphus Lewisii Parsh.), 513, 536. 
Weapons, hunting, 224, 225, 343, 349, 516. of war, 174, 234, 335, 348, 349, 366, 367, 
538-540, 547, 754, 785. Weather, beliefs regarding, 281, 290, 201, 601, 603, 607, 620. Weaving, of basketry, 207-209, 490. of blankets, 210-212, 775. ‘materials for, 220. 
of mats and bags, 215, 49, 49%, 774: stool used in, 212. Weber, Ellen R. C, cited, 135, 154, 158. collection of, 135, 176, 180, 181. Weber, Rudolf, artist, 57, 136, 304. Wedges, from shell heaps on Lower Fraser, 139, 141, 161, 162, 188. of Lillooet, 203, 204. from shellheaps in Puget Sound region, 344, 
345, 359, 369, 375, 378, 380, 388, 389, 39, 
397, 434, 437. of Shuswap, 474. Weirs. See Traps. Westlake, William, 304. Whale, bones of, found in shellheaps of the Lower Fraser, 140. sculptured mortar representing fisback, 340,425. uses of bone of, 211. vertebra of, bark-breaker made of, 317. vertebra of, sculptured, 184, 370, 321. Whaling harpoon point of shell, 341. Whetstones from shellheaps on Lower Fraser, 139, 140, 158, 188. from shell-heaps in Puget Sound region, 312, 
314) 339: 360, 364, 377, 389, 392. 
 

----

INDEX TO VOLUME IL 
Whetstones, Shuswap, 474. ‘Whidbey Island, Wash, ancient campsite on, 379. cairns on, 55, 8, 74, 75, 373, 434 Whipping customs, 262, 263, 586. Whistles, 254, 264, 588, 723. ‘White-Chief, story of Butcetsa and, 733-735. ‘Whites, Shuswap names for, 452. wars of Chilcotin with, 784, 785. ‘Wickersham, James, 304. Widows and widowers, 27%, 297, 593, 594- Williams Lake band of Shuswap, 458-460, 464. 549- Willoughby, C, cited, 79. Willow-bark clothing, 218. Wind, stories of capturing the, 6, 42, 43, 53, 54, 
702, 703. story of liberation of, 624, 625. Windermere, Lake, 455. Winds, Shuswap beliefs regarding, 597, 598. Wipers, 583, 787. Witcheralt, 288, 612, 613, 615, 616, 789. Wolf clan of Lillooet, 252. Wollochet Bay, shell-heap on, 4oo. Wolverene, stories of, 40, 41, 53, 671-673, 68, 749. 
Wolves, stories of, 33, 34, 41, 52, 53, 637, 638, 671, 672, 718-720, 751, 752.    
  813 
Women, customs regarding, 269, 593. Women who married the Cannibal (Star) and ‘Wolverene, story of, 687-68. Wood, work in, 133, 303-305, 216, 315, 475, 
531, 776. tools used for work in, 161, 163, 188, 311, 
338. Woodpeckers, stories of, 659-665, 753. Woods, Miss E. H., 304 Work baskets or bags, 216, 217. World, beliefs regarding, 274, 595-601, 788. Wren, stories of the, 126, 127, 132, 678, 679, 
750-75. Wristlets and anklets, 178, 179. 
Vaxoa, 452. Yakima Valley, specimens rom, 320, 379, 416, 417. Yale, specimens from vicinity of, 364-367, 422, 426-420. Yellow Head Pass, 451, 453, 454, 468, 553. Yellow Island, figures of birds on cliff 03, 329. petroglyps on, 324-326. 
Vewtree (Zarus brevifolia), wood of, used in ‘making bows, 224. Vukaghir, bark dishes of, 486.

----

