IL. — Myrsorosy or tie Tromeson Inprans. 
By Jawss Tar. 
      CONTENTS. 
Pace INTRODUCTORY . + + + + . . . . . 203 24. TappedhisLegs (Tski-¢laxa- ; tem) Lo. Ca Myris AND TALES 0F THE UTKMGr . . 205 25a. Bonle of the Birds | | | | 
L Coyote Tales. . . . . . ... 05 235. Battle of the Birds . . . . 1. Niikisters . . . . . . . 208 26. Wren (Tsetso). . . . . . 2. Coyote and his Guests. . . . 206 27. Hare and Grisly Bear 3. Coyote and Elk CL aep 28. Blucjay (Kwékskwa or Kauwe 4 Coyote's visit to Soliep . . . 209 yaa). Looe 5. Coyote and the Cold -. . . . aro 6. Coyote and Wood Tick _ _ . arr | V-Hero Tales. ns 7. Coyote juggles with his Eyes . 212 20. Xemiax LLL 8. Coyote and the Women . . . 212 30: Nene ce 
5 Bogner Gini ET RE EE: d M 32. The Old Woman and the Boy IL Transformer Tales . . . a8 35 Owl and Twas, . +. 10. Nspatee'tceit, or The Four Black 34 Stubbed-withhisLeg | | 
Bears; also called The Qwa'qt- 35. The Lad who shot the ‘Snake quar Brothers. . . LL. . 218 30 ClosecutHair +» © +. 11, Childof Hog Fennel (Kokwe'la- BI). . su. +... . 224 | VL Ancestor Tales fom Spuzaum . . 
12. The Transformer. . . . . . 226 37. The Origin of the Wau'us Mask 
13. The Great Chief. . . . . . 228 38. Tou Origin ot the Tsatsa’kwe 
ack LoL. ILL Other Origin Myths . . . . . . 229 karat wis mouse Tonge 14. The Mosquito and the Thunder 229 So The Origin of the Spon x5. The Moon and his Younger Sister 229 People 16. The People who never slept. . 229 41. The Dog People + + © 17. Beaver and Eagle; or, The Ori of Fire . . 15. Beaver and the Frogs (a Flood Myth) Loo... x9. The Bad Boy; or, The Sun and thelad. . » . oo... 20. The War of the Fishes . 
IV. Animal Tales. . . . . . . . . ar. Swamp-Robin . . . . . . . a2 Skunk oo... Lo... 23. Fisher's Wife; or, Marten and Fisher . . . . ..o. . 
  230 231 
233 233 233 
236   42. The Deep Underground House 
VIL Semi-Historical Tales . . . . 43. The War-Party that killed the Sturgeon . oo 44. The Strange People discovered by the Swtcinko . . . . 45. The Strange People discovered by the Hunters. . 
VIIL Tales adopted from the Coast Tribes 46 Mink Lo... 47. Skaiya'm. LoL. 
[x99] 
  Pace 
241 
243 245 246 
247 
48 
250 50 
254 258 261 264 265 269 269 269 
a2 272 
213 274 
275 276 
277 
278 
278 
79 
280 
281 281 283

----

200 
48. Made - her -sit-down-on-a-Seat (tkwd'patém) .. 49. Burncd-Themselves (O'atcu’t) © 
IX. Tales based on European Folklore so. AME LL... $1. The four children . 52. The wonderful Boy. . 
Myras AND TALES #Rox NicoLa VALLEY AD Fraser RIVER 
L Coyote Tales... . . . . . . ©. The Coyote . . . . . . 2. Nukesentem . . 3. Coyote and the Cannibal Owl . 4 The Dogs of Coyote and Cannibal 5. Coyote’s Daughters and their Dogs. . . . oo. 6. Lynx: or, The Sisters who mar- ried Coyote and Lynx. . . . 7. Coyote and his Daughter . . . 8. Coyote and his Guests. . . . o. Coyote and the Introduction of Salmon . Lo... to. Coyote and Buffalo . . . . 1. Coyote and the Cannibal Elk © 12. Coyote and the Tobacco-Tree . 13. Coyote and Goatsucker . . . 14. Coyote in Nicola Valley . 15. Coyote is Thirsty . . . . . 15a. Coyote is Thirsty . . . . . 16. Coyote and some 7. Coyote and Deer, and the eye- juggling . . + . Ra 15. Coyote and the Geese. | . 19. Coyote and the Eggs . . . . 20. Coyote and Grisly Bear . . . 21. Coyote and Grisly Bear . . 22. Coyote and Xaxd' . . 23. Coyote and Antelope; or, Story of the Copper Ball, . . . . . 24. Coyote and the Monster . 
IL Transformer Tales . . . . . . . 25. The Quo'qiqwat. . . . . . 26. Kokwe'la, or Kokwelahet © 27-36. Old-One . . . 27. Creation of the World by the OldOne . . . . 38. Old-One and the End of the Word . . 29. Old-One and the Earth, Sun, and People . . So. The Creation of the Earth by OldOne +. «Lo. 
  CONTENTS. 
Pace 
285 287 
28g 289 201 202 
321 
  322 31. 0ld-One and the Creation of the Nicola Country. . . 32. 0ld-One and Women . . 33. Old-One and Ku'wen. . . 34 Old-One and Sucker ( 35. Old-One and the Beavers 36. Old-One teaches the People the Use of Omaments. . 
  IIL Origin Tales . . . 37. The Introduction of Death; or, ‘The Council of Spider, Ant, and Fly © Frog and Moon . . . . . . Wolverine . . . . . . . . Sna'naz and the Wind | | Men and Women . . Women and Deer giving Birth The White-Fish . . . . . Origin of the EIk . | | Sun and his Questioner . Origin of Land and Water My- series LL... Beaver and the Flood . . . . Noaksatisatwaug. . . . . Origin of Light . . . . . . Light and Darkness. . . . . Thunder and Turtle Thunder and Mosquito Loon. . oo... Sun and Moon | . | . The Ants and the Fleas . . Beaver and Muskrat. . . Blue Jay and Sweat-House . . . The Theft of Fire . . . . .  Ratlesnake-Woman . . . . . The Rattlesnakes and Mesti | . Wren and the Cannibal Eagle . 
  IV. Animal Tales. . . . 62. The Black and the Grisly Bears Marten and Fisher . . . . . . Wren and the Elks . . . . . Moose, Buffalo, Antelope, and White-tailed Deer. . . . . Baldheaded Eagle . . . . . . The Three OWl Sisters. . . . . Titne'i's War for the Salmon; or, The Introduction of Salmon . War between the Fishes of the Interior and of the Coast. . . War of the Nicola Animals and Fraser River Fish . . . . 71. The Okanagon Fish People . . Pace 
324 327 
327 327 328 
328 
39 
329 330 330 330 330 331 331 
331 332 
332 333 334 334 334 335 335 336 336 336 337 337 338 
339 339 340 
342 342 342 342 
343 345 346 
34 
350 
352 353

----

CONTENTS. 
    Pace 72a. The Girl and the Dog . . . 354 | VI Tales based on European Folk-Lore 735. The Girl and the Dog . . . 354 96. Ko'kenaleks . . . . . 72. Gridy Beats Grandchid; or, 97. Porcupine; or, Porcupine and Spetlamulax . . . . . . . 355 Horse . . . 74. Skeluna Lo. LL... 38 98. The Young Man and the Cant 75 Muskrat. oo... LoL. 360 nibal Lo... 76. Muskrat. . Lo... . . 362 99. The Lad and the White Horse MEK Lo... FT 100. Ant and the Beads . . . . 78. Tore and Grisly Bear | | | 365 sor. Sna'naz and the Shaman. . 704. Xolakwa'xa, or ATquy . . . 365 102. The Turtles and the Runner 706. Xolakwa'xa . . . 367 103. The Girl who sought her Brothers So. The One Gummed (ALETatem) 367 704. Old-One; or, Chief and the Aged 81. Nuikepsatem . . . . . . . 367 Couple; or, The Introduction of 8: The *stuen and the Cloud: Com + la. Women on | . Biblical Tales . . . V. Horo Tales. . . 370 Tos. Creation of the Horse, and the 85. The Man who iived with the a a Eira te Eagles . . . oan X 84. The Snake Lover or, The Woman 106. God and the Flood; or, The and the Snake Mystery . . . 32 Seip Ma Ba ystery. 37 107. The Making of Languages . . 85. The Brother who went to the ne lg 108, Dispersion of Tribes, and Origin 56. Underground World... . 373 of Languages. . . . . . . was. LoL. LL LL a, 8. Alte co HH tog. Su'Ssakuli, or Su'tsakre . 
88. The Wounded Giant. | | | 376 | VIIL Historical Tales . 85. The Giant who stole the Kere. 110, War Story (Nikweliyen and meous Woman. . . . . . 316 Slemti'tsa . . . . go. The Hunter and the Wolf . . 378 121, War Story of Women at Botan or. The Grisly Bear who stole a 112. Account of Cumaxa'lsa . .". Woman . . . . a8 113. Account of the Lytton Chiefs . 93. The Sons who sought their Mother 379 114. Tradition of Simon Fraser's Visit 93. The Grisly Bear Boy; or, The in 1808. on Stolen Girls... . . . . 30 115. Mythological Version of the 94. The Lad who ran away from his Capsiring of Simon Fraser's Parents . . . . . . 381 Canoe in Fraser River . . . 95. The Woman who was impaled   onaTree . . . ..... 38%

----



----

INTRODUCTORY. 
Ta following collection of myths of the Thompson Indians has been in 
my hands for quite a number of years. Their publication has been delayed 
because it scemed desirable, on account of the large amount of mythological material brought together by the Jesup Expedition, to devote a whole volume 
and a complete discussion to this subject. Unfortunately this has not been 
possible; and it has been necessary to scatter the material in a number of 
publications, and much of it remains still unpublished. For this reason the 
present series is given without a detailed comparison, which would have to 
be repeated and expanded when the references to the unpublished material 
should become available. It is hoped that after publication of the original 
data, the general discussion can be given in, the final volume of this series. 
Part of the material here referred to has been published in Vol. II of the 
“Columbia University Contributions to Anthropology” (Franz Boas, *Kwakiutl 
Tales”). The discussion of the folkloristic and mythological contents of this 
volume must also be given in connection with that of the rest of the mytho- 
logical material from the same area. 
I have classified the traditions collected by Mr. Teit according to their 
contents. The line of demarcation between the various groups is, of course, 
not to be taken as definite. The animal tales contain many incidents of 
transformation and origins, and some of the human hero-stories do not differ in their fundamental character from the animal stories. The ancestor stories of Spuzzum are clearly an expression of the influence of the family legends of the coast. Tales of this type seem to be confined to the village of Spuzzum, 
which lies near to the villages of the Delta tribes. The semi-historical tales 
refer partly to personal supernatural experiences, partly to the assimilation of 
the Nooksak tribe by the Delta tribes. In the group “Tales adopted from 
the Coast Tribes” I have combined those that differ in type from the Thompson 
tales and have close analogues among the tribes of the Gulf of Georgia. 
The Mink and Skaiya’m legends have been recorded from the Fraser Delta; also 
the tale of “Burned Themselves,” which, however, has no close analogue in 
other parts of the coast of British Columbia. The tale “Made her-sit-down- 
ona-Seat” is well known over a large part of the coast of southern British 
Columbia. 
The traditions recorded in the first part of this collection are all from 
[203] 26 JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

204 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
the canyon of Fraser River (Uta'mqt), and, when not otherwise stated, belong 
to the upper part of the canyon. The traditions recorded in the second part 
are all from Nicola Valley (Tcawa'xamu) unless otherwise stated. 
The tales from European sources are curious and interesting. Analogous 
modifications of European folk-tales occur in the interior, but hardly at all on 
the coast. 
Franz Boas. 
New York, July, 1911.

----

Myris ano Tass or tie Uramr. 
I. — COYOTE TALES. 
1. Nii'kisentem. 
Lower and Upper Utd'mgt. 
[This story is told nearly in the same way as the second Coyote story in my “Traditions of 
the Thompson River Indians” pp. 21-20).! The following parts are different. The first part of 
the story is not related; viz., about Coyote making a son of clay, gum, and quartz. The story 
begins as follows.) 
Coyote lived with his son, who had two wives, one of whom was dark- 
skinned, and the other fair. Coyote was jealous of his son's wives, and 
coveted them for himself. He did not know, however, which of them he 
liked the better: so one night he made a very large fire, and, taking advantage 
of the bright blaze, he watched his chance to look at the women's privates. - 
He was so favorably impressed with those of the fair one, that he at once 
made up his mind to get rid of his son, and take possession of his wife for 
himself. Eagle-plumes were scarce, and therefore highly valued: so he caused 
an eagle's nest to appear on a steep cliff} with eaglets in it. He then called 
his son, and said to him, I will show you where you can get eagle-feathers.” Coyote took him to the cliff, and, pointing out to him the eagle's nest near 
the top, said, “Climb for it, I will help you” As his son climbed, Coyote looked upwards from time to time, and each time he did so the cliff grew higher. 
    [The rest of the story goes on just the same as in the Upper Thompson version until the incident of meeting the two old women is reached, when it is rotten rock they are handing to each other, instead of rotten wood as in the Upper Thompson version. From here on, the story is exactly the same as the Upper Thompson tale (omitting, of course, the examining of the women, which has already been mentioned) up to the point where Nii’kiseatem is feasting the people. Then it runs as follows.) 
Coyote went to the feast with the other people, and, after cating, wiped 
his knife on his brow. Instead, however, of drawing the flat side of his knife 
over his brow, he drew the edge over it, thus making a large gash right 
across. 
[Then the story is just the same, except that when Coyote falls down in the creck and is drifting, he changes himself into a wooden dish instead of into a piece of board, as in the Upper ‘Thompson version. Then the story continues the sume until Coyote is taking the salmon up the   
See alo James Teit, The Shuswap, Vol. IL of this series, p. 622. 2 Some Lower Utimgt say it was a tree. 
[205]

----

206 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
Fraser River, when he shouts as he proceeds ahead of the salmon, 0 as to let the people know. that he is bringing that wonderful fish. The incident of throwing the penis is the same, with this difference.) 
He is carrying his penis on his back rolled up in leaves. He takes it 
off and throws it, etc. The other girls tried to cut it off from the girl in 
which it was, as she was unable to walk with the weight; but although they 
used sharp stones and knives, they were unable to cut it. Then Coyote cried 
out across the river, “Cut it with swamp-grass (a variety with sharp edges). 
They did as directed, and only the point was left in. 
[From here the story is just the same, with the following additions.] 
When introducing the salmon into the Okanagon! country, he met Wolve- 
rene, and asked him for his daughter. His wish was granted, and she became 
his wife. After some time she gave birth to a daughter, who accompanied 
her father when travelling about on the Upper Columbia. He threw her into 
that river, where she lay down on her back and was turned into stone. This 
rock forms part of the Falls of the Columbia, and the salmon ascend the 
river on either side of it. 
[The last part of the story (pp. 28, 29), relating the wonderful feats of Coyote, and the 
incident with the Grisly Bear, are not told by the Utt'mqt.] 
2. Coyote and his Guests. 
(Lower Utt'mgt.) 
[Coyote's guests were Black Bear, Kingfisher, and Magpie. This story is told exactly the 
same as No. 8 Coyote story on pp. 40-42 of the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” 
but has the following additional details. At the beginning of the story, Coyote was hungry and 
naked, being clad only in an old (woven) rabbit-skin blanket: so Black Bear, taking pity on him, 
invited him to her underground lodge, and so on. The beginning of the magpie incident is a little different] 
Coyote thought he would visit the Magpie. So he repaired to the latter's 
house, where he was kindly treated. Magpie went out and netted a deer, and 
Coyote watched him from a distance. After bringing home a deer, Magpie 
treated Coyote to a hearty meal of fresh meat. On leaving, Coyote invited 
Magpie to his house on the morrow. On his arrival, Coyote said, *I will go 
out and catch a deer, so you may have a good meal” He went out and 
d Magpie's tactics of deer-catching, with the result as’told in the Upper 
Thompson story of this incident. 
[The foliowing is additional at the end of the story, after the Magpie incident.) 
Coyote thought he would visit Wood-Tick (Kitse/in)* who lived in a 
    
Some tay Simlkameen. Compare the end of this story with No. 4 Coyote story, (Traditions of the Thompson Rive Indisas, P31), sod also with the Upper Uti'mqt Coyote story (p- 211 of this publication). The corresponding Shuswap. story 1. c. p. 627 does not show close correspondence with the present one. * Kitse'in or Kitsi'n (wood-iek"), — a tick that lives on deer and horses in the winter-ime, sad sucks their blood. 
   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 207 
house under a high rock. Wood Tick lived on deer,! which he obtained by 
striking this rock with his magic staff. If he desired one deer, he went 
up to the rock and struck it once; and if he wished four deer, he struck the rock with his staff four times; and immediately that number of deer fell down 
from the top of the cliff 
Now Coyote knew how Wood-Tick managed to procure his food. He 
also knew the valuable properties of his magic staff, and therefore he desired 
to obtain possession of it. When Coyote reached Wood-Tick's house, he was 
invited to enter. As there was no meat in the house at the time, Wood-Tick 
said he would go and procure a deer for his guest; but Coyote said, “You 
need not trouble. If you loan me your staff, I shall go and get one for you." 
Coyote knew that Wood-Tick was a lazy individual and did not care about 
travelling much. Wood Tick assented to Coyote’s proposal, and gave him his 
staff, but before his departure gave strict injunctions to Coyote not to strike 
the rock more than four times. When Coyote reached the cliff, he struck it 
four times, and a deer fell down each time. Then he said to himself, “Why 
should 1 not strike it oftener?” so he struck it the fifth time, but no deer 
fell down. Then he struck it for the sixth and seventh times, but with like 
results. When he struck it the eighth time, the four deer became alive, and, 
jumping up, ran away. 
Now Coyote threw off his blanket, and, following the deer, ran to Wood- 
Tick's house as fast as he could, but arrived just in time to see Wood-Tick 
going off riding on one of the decr’s cars. Looking around in the house, 
he saw some deer fat in one corner. Taking hold of it, he swallowed it, 
saying, “I will have something to eat, anyway” but the fat came up again, 
and, jumping out of his mouth, ran away. Seeing some deer-bones near the fire, he reached to take hold of them; but, just as his fingers almost touched 
them, they got up and ran away. Every bit of deer fat, meat, blood, and 
bone ran away, so Coyote was left without anything to eat. 
3. Coyote and Elk. 
Elk had been killed by another Elk who belonged to a country situated 
at a distance, and all his wives had been taken away by the victor. Coyote, 
as he came along the trail? noticed EIK’s body lying there, and made fun 
of it. Elk felt angry at the taunting and sarcastic remarks passed by Coyote : 
so he came to life again, and began to chase him. He had nearly overtaken 
Coyote, when the latter entered the ground, and, passing through a hill, came 
out at the other side. By thus outwitting Elk, and taking a short cut, he 
obtained again a long start over Elk.   
Some say deer's blood. + Some say he struck off a chip from the rock cach time. 3 Some say it was probably the trail between Similkameen ead Nicola.

----

208 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
At last Elk spied him a long distance ahead; and Coyote cried out, “You better stay where you are, for you can never overtake mel” Elk 
answered, “You may play all the tricks you like, but I shall overtake you 
and kill you, just the same.” So he gave chase again, and soon drew up 
on Coyote, who had recourse to the same expedient as before. 
When Elk caught sight of him again, he was far ahead. Coyote cried out, “You better stay where you are, Slow-Feet, for you will never overtake 
me! The like of you can never kill me.” Elk answered, “You may boast 
as you like, and play what tricks you like, but I shall certainly overtake and kill you” So he gave chase again with renewed vigor. Again Coyote had 
recourse to the same trick; but Elk persevered in the chase, and gradually 
made the distance less between himself and the fugitive. 
When Elk was chasing him for the fourth time, Coyote saw that he was going to be overtaken, as he felt tired and out of wind; so he pulled 
out four pubic hairs! threw them on the ground, and they at once became 
four tall yellow-pine trees (Pinus ponderosa)? into one of which he climbed 
for refuge. Elk came up, and at once started to chop it down. When it 
was about to fall, Coyote jumped into the branches of another one, but Elk 
chopped it down too. When Elk had nearly gotten the fourth one down, 
Coyote cried out, “Do not kill me! I can be of service to you. Spare me, 
and 1 will be your friend. 1 will help you to fight your enemies.” Elk said, 
“Do you really mean what you say?” and Coyote answered, “Yes, I will 
really be your friend, and will help you to fight your encmies.’ 
Elk accepted him as an ally; and they trained themselves, and made preparations for taking the war-path. Coyote had pitch-wood fastened to his 
head for antlers. Elk proposed to attack his enemy single-handed but if the 
latter got the best of him, then Coyote was to come to his aid. Arriving at 
the house of their enemy, Elk engaged him in combat and slew him. Then 
he took possession of his enemy's house and all his wives, as well as his 
own wives, which he thus got back. 
When Coyote was about to depart for his own country, Elk said, “I will 
give you one wife? to be food for you on your journey.” Coyote departed 
with the woman: and the first night in camp he cut off a piece of her haunch 
and ate it; on the second night he cut off a larger picce; and on the third 
night he said to himself, “I will cut off enough to-night to appease my 
appetite;” so he cut a very large piece off the woman's haunch, and, having 
caten it all, he felt satisfied. The fourth night the woman said to herself, “I will leave Coyote. He cuts off larger picces every night, and makes me 
sore.” So she deserted Coyote, who had to continue his journey alone.   
+ See Shuswap p. 636. # This tree does not grow in the Utimqt country, except in the very northern portion. 2 The wives, it is ssid, were also Elks.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 209 
4. Coyote’s visit to So‘iep.! 
Coyote made up his mind to visit a wicked people who lived in an 
underground lodge? on the far side of a large river. The chief man of these 
people was called So‘iep,® and his right-hand man's name was Kual'm* Both 
were noted for being highly gifted in magic. The chief had a daughter, but 
he would not allow her to marry any of the young men. 
Coyote took his son along with him, and, reaching the crossing-place of 
the river, they shouted to be taken across. An old woman® came with a 
canoe, and they jumped into it. She told them that the people whom they 
intended to visit were very bad, and that So'iep, their chief, had two large 
and fierce dogs, — Grisly Bear and Rattlesnake, — that he made devour every young man who came to seek his daughter's hand. Coyotes son told 
her that he wished to marry So‘ieps daughter: therefore the old woman told 
him what tests they would put him through, and how they would try to kill 
him. She also gave him much advice, and full directions how to act in each 
emergency. 
When Coyote and his son entered So'iep’s house, he put on an immense 
fire, expecting to overcome them with heat; but they put lumps of ice on 
their foreheads and remained unhurt. When So'iep saw that his visitors were 
endowed with magic, and that the dogs had been afraid to bite them, he 
gave his daughter in marriage to Coyote's son, but swore in secret. to kill 
him if he could. 
That night Sofiep said to Kualw'm, “Take my son-indaw hunting to- 
morrow.” Next morning Kualw'm did as directed, and while they were hunting, 
and separated from each other, he set fire to the grass, intending to burn the 
lad; but the latter stepped in the middle of a large trail, and remained unharmed. 
Kualu'm returned, thinking he had burned the boy, but the latter arrived shortly afterwards. Then So‘iep said, “Take my son-in-law to gather fire- wood to-morrow.” So Kualu'm took him to gather fire-wood. They came to a dry tree, and the lad began to split it. The tree opened suddenly, and the lad's wedge fell inside. The trec was very large and hollow in the centre. As the lad was going in through the crack, Kuali'm made the tree close together so as to squeeze him, but the lad placed his wedge crossways in the crack and remained unhurt. Then he spat out red and white paint from his mouth into the cracks of the tree, so that the paint oozed out and ran   
| Compare this story with the latter part of No. 7 Coyote tale in “Traditions of the Thompson River Indinns” p. 38. y there were four underground lodges. of name unkown, but may be derived from s'ifp (“flame”). + Meaning of name unknown. + Some say ShortTailed Mouse, who was noted as being very wise, and able 1o look into the future, She was also a great linguist, and. could spesk all languages    
   

----

210 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
down on the outside. Kualwm, thinking that the white paint was his brains, 
and the red paint his blood, made sure he had killed him this time; but, 
shortly after Kualum had reached home and reported his death, the lad 
arrived carrying a load of firewood. Then Sofiep said, “Take my son-inlaw to spear salmon to-morrow.” 
So Kualum took him as directed. They went to the river, where Kualu'm 
gave the lad a spear to use which had a head of copper. Presently a salmon 
appeared, and the lad was going to spear it; but Kualu'm said, “That is not 
a salmon, it is a merman (raraa'tko).” Then a fish appeared which had the 
head of a man and very long hair: so Kualum said, “Spear that, it is a 
salmon.” The lad speared it, and was pulled, spear and all, underneath the 
water, where he disappeared from sight. Kualu'm went home and reported 
the lad’s death, but shortly afterwards he appeared and entered the lodge, 
carrying the merman on his back. Now, Coyote said he would kill these people, so he kicked down earth 
from a mountainside? on them; but they escaped unharmed, excepting his 
daughter-in-law, who was buried alive. Then he caused a cold wind to blow, 
and the ice dammed up the water of the river, so that it ran over the top 
of the ice and flooded the surrounding country. The water which flowed 
over the country and filled So‘iep’s underground lodge formed into ice, and 
all the people were frozen to death. Then Coyote and his son® returned to 
their own country. 
     
5. Coyote and the Cold. 
Coyote was travelling over the country, and came to a sweat-house near 
the bank of a river. It was covered over, and was occupied by a man who 
was sweating. Coyote said, *I wish to sweat with you;” and the man inside 
assented, saying, “All right! Take off your robe and come in.” Coyote 
divested himself of his blanket® and entered. As soon as he came in, the man made much steam by throwing water on the stones, so Coyote sweated 
profusely and went out to plunge into the stream. He entered twice again, 
and each time the man made much steam, so Coyote could stay in only for 
a short time. The man never went out to wash in the water   
+ See Thompson Indians, 1. <. p. 42. = Some say he kicked down a hill on them. 2 Some say Coyote alone returned, for bis son had been buried alive with his wife whea his father kicked down the mouatain-side on the people. + Some claim that this man was the owner (or originator) of the cold and also of the wind. robe or blanket made of twisted strips of lire, beaver, o coyote-skin, woven. Those of hare: skins were the commonest, but beaver.sking were also much used, and occasionally coyote-skins; any skin blanket made of twisted strips. tis the custom of all the Tndians in the southern interior of British Columbia to plange or wash in cold water after each sweat, They sweatbathe a great deal at the present day. © The Tianeh Indians of the northern interior never went into the water after sweating, and at the present day hardly ever sweatbathe.     ® Tass, 
   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 211 
When Coyote was washing for the third time, he said to himself, *I will 
make that fellow come out; so he made two salmon appear in the river 
close to the shore. Then, on entering the sweat-house for the fourth time, he 
said to the man, “There are two salmon in the river where I was washing.” 
The man said, “I do not believe you. There are no salmon in the river, 
and none in this country.” Coyote said, “I do not lie. Come and see for 
yourself.” So the man went outside, and saw the salmon close to the shore, 
swimming slowly upstream. Coyote told him to take his blanket and catch 
them. He waded into the stream and tried to catch them with the blanket; 
but Coyote made them swim outstream, so that they were always a little beyond his reach, and the man followed them. At last he got beyond his depth, 
and, the current catching him, he was swept away downstream. Then Coyote 
went back to the sweat-house and stole the man’s clothes, which he put on, 
and also his head-band, which was covered with dentalia. He also took his 
decorated quiver, and the four blankets which covered the sweat-house, which 
were the doors of the “house of the cold.” * 
Coyote continued his journey; but the man got ashore before very long, 
and, finding that Coyote had stolen his property, he caused a violent wind 
to blow. Coyote held on to the blankets; but one after another was blown 
away from him as the wind increased in violence. Coyote was in danger of 
being blown away himself, so he caught hold of trees; but each tree in turn 
was blown down with the strength of the wind. Only when the head-band, 
quiver, and all the clothes, had been blown off Coyote’s body, the wind ceased, 
and Coyote went on his way naked. 
6. Coyote and Wood-Tick.* 
At last he came to a house, which was inhabited by Wood-Tick (Kitse/in). 
He entered and the latter gave him some fat to eat. Coyote said, “I am 
hungry and naked, and would like to stay with you as your servant.” Wood- 
Tick agreed to this, and, pointing to a large heap of deer-skins, told him to tan them. So Coyote staid with Wood-Tick, and tanned many doeskins for 
him, and made soft robes and clothes for himself. 
After a time Wood-Tick trusted him, and sent him to get deer-meat. 
He gave him his staff, and told him to go up to a steep cliff overlooking 
the house, and to strike the rock once with the staff. He cautioned him particularly never to strike it more than once. Coyote did as directed, and,   
+ The house of the cold (where the cold weather was kept) is said to have had four doors, cach of which consisted of a blanket. Each entrance was covered with a blaaket, like many of the eatrances to Indian lodges at the preseat day. 2 Compare story No. 3, p. 306 of this publication. 3 Kitse'n, generally called wood-tick by the whites. A tick which is found on deer, horses, etc, generally in the wintertime, and is said to come out of fr of other brush. In the early spring they are often found sticking on horses in great numbers, and swelled out to a large size with blood. I think they may be Neotome. 
  27 JRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VIEL

----

212 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
as soon as he struck the rock, a dead deer appeared at his feet. He skinned 
it, cut it up, and carried it home. When Wood Tick saw that he had done 
everything right, he made up his mind to send him for meat every day. On 
the fourth day, when Coyote was up on the rock, he made up his mind to 
strike it often and see what effect it would have: so he struck the rock with the staff until his arm was tired, and a dead deer fell at his feet cach time. 
Then he said to himself, “I have now so much meat that I shall never 
starvey” and, returning to Wood-Tick's house, he struck him on the head 
with a stone. After a time Wood-Tick revived, and cried out, “Get up and gol" Then all the deer became alive and ran away. Wood-Tick jumped 
on a buck's car and made off with the rest. Coyote got excited and ran to 
save some fat, but it got up and ran away. The robes in his bed, and the 
buckskin clothes he was wearing, ran away; and every piece of deers bone, 
hair, and skin around the place got up and followed the rest: so Coyote 
was left without food, and with only his robe, as before. 
7. Coyote juggles with his Eyes! 
Continuing his travels, he came to a place where he saw Blue-Grouse 
throwing his cyes up in the air and catching them. Coyote said to himself, 
“I can also perform that feat,” so he pulled out his eyes and threw them up 
in the air; but Raven caught them and flew away with them, so Coyote was 
left without eyes and unable to sce. He went groping about, and, coming 
to a patch of Aimnikinnit or bearberries, he sclected two of the berries, and 
put them in his eye-sockets as substitutes for eyes. He was then able to see 
a little, but only very dimly. Continuing his journey, he came to the out- 
skirts of a village where some boys were playing. One boy who was near 
him called him “red-cyes” and other sarcastic names. Coyote said, *Although 
my eyes are red, I can see as well as you can. I can see the Pleiades 
(nxa'us)” The boy laughed and said, “How can you see the Pleiades? It 
is just noon. I know now for a certainty that you cannot see with your red 
eyes” Then Coyote seized the boy, and, taking out his eyes, put them in 
his own head, and, putting his bearberry eyes in the boy's head, he turned 
him into a bird called teélduin. 
8. Coyote and the Women. 
Some time afier this, Coyote came within sight of some lodges the 
inhabitants of which scemed to be taking down the coverings and making 
preparations to depart. He changed his appearance so as to resemble an 
old woman, and, approaching, accosted the inhabitants, who consisted of four   
Ses Shuswap, p. 632.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 213 
young women. They told him that they were getting ready to go to a gathering, and that the rest of the people had already departed. He said 
to them, “I wish to go to the gathering also. Do not leave me behind. I 
am your grandmother” The women said they would not desert him; but when ready to go, Coyote declared that he was unable to walk, and asked 
them to carry him. They said they would carry him by tums. One woman 
put her strap around him and carried him; but her head got sore, and she 
put the strap down on her breast, but it also got sore. Then Coyote said, 
“If you lengthen your strap and let me down lower on your back, you will 
not feel sore” The woman did as directed and lowered him down on her 
back; but she got sorc again, and Coyote directed her to lower him down 
farther, which she did. Then, as she carried him, Coyote made his penis 
touch her privates from behind; and, as soon as the woman was aware of 
this, she dropped him on the ground, and would not carry him any more. 
She did not tell the other women what had happened: so another one put 
her strap around him and carried him on her back. He dealt with her in 
like manner, and also with the other two women: so all four were pregnant 
when they reached the place where the people were assembled.! 
9. He-spit-on-her Belly (Pitséqanekatem).* 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
A young man lived in the mountains with his two sisters. He was a 
great hunter, and always had large stores of fat meat and skins in his house 
and caches. He bathed himself every day in a creck near by; and the needles which came off his sponge of fir-branches, and fell into the water, 
became dentalia (szag)? Some of these be used to take home to his sisters every night. He gave them strict injunctions never to visit his bathing-place. 
The elder sister had told the younger one where their brother obtained his 
dentalia, and this made the younger girl very anxious to see the place. 
One day their brother was hunting, as usual, and the sisters went out 
for a walk. The younger sister bothered the elder so much to show her 
their brother's bathing-place, that at last she assented and took her there. 
They picked up a great quantity of dentalia from underneath the water and 
carried them home. 
Now, their brother, who was tracking deer, knew at once, that they 
had touched the dentalia; so he became sorrowful, and went home carrying   
+ Some claim that there is more of this story which relates how Coyote's eyes were passed round among. All the people, and how by some means he got them back; but I was unable to find avy one who knew this part of the story in detail # Compare this story with No. 27, p. 77 aod No. 7, p. 36 (Coyote), Traditions of the Thompson River Indians. 3 A large variety of deatalia.

----

214 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
his pack of deer-meat on his back. He hung up his quiver, and left his 
pack on the floor of the lodge. He had made up his mind to desert his 
sisters for their disobedience: therefore, lifting up the fire-stone of the under- ground house, he went down the hole which led underneath to the lower world! 
When the sisters arrived home, they saw their brother's quiver and pack 
of meat; so they knew he had been home. His dog was whining, and 
scratching up the earth around the base of the firestone: so the sisters turned 
it over to sce what was the matter. When they did so, they saw there was 
a hole there, and the wind rushed up through it from below. They looked 
down through it, and saw their brother laying ball * with the people in the 
lower world. 
The elder sister was angry at the younger because she had enticed her 
to their brother's bathing-place. She said, “You sce what the result is of 
disobeying our brother's command.” The sisters were very sorry, and wept 
sorely; so that some of their tears fell down the hole and on their brother, 
who was playing below. When their brother noticed the drops falling on him, he sat down, and 
said to himself, “That is a wonderful thing: a drop has fallen on my hand.” He looked up, but saw no signs of rain. He wondered, because it never 
used to rain formerly, and he saw no signs of it then! Now he thought to 
himself, “It must be a tear, and my sisters are weeping for me in the upper 
world” The other ball.players asked what ailed him. Has any one struck 
you with his ball-stick?” they said; but he answered, “No, I am only sorrowful 
because my sisters weep for me.” Then he made himself invisible, and, going up the hole, he stood at his 
sisters’ backs. They were glad to sce him, and implored him not to desert 
them. He said, “I must return to the lower world” Then his youngest sister 
said, “Then we will accompany you” He said, “Very well, shut your eyes 
and jump down, but do not open them until you reach the bottom.” They 
shut their eyes and jumped, but opened them again; so they were forced up 
again. Thus their brother tried to- get them down four times, but cach time 
they opened their eyes and came back. Then their brother said, “It is useless 
to try to get you to the lower world. You better go to your aunt the Elk. 
He gave them meat® to cat on the road, and directions how to go. He also 
said, “If you see any house on the way, do not enter it.” Thus he left them 
and returned to the lower world.   
+ Most Indians say that these people lived in our world, and that the hunter went to the lower world underneath ours; bat some say they lived in the upper world, and that wheo the brother left, he descended to our world. 2 Some say he was playing a ballgame called *ssihala,” which is somewhat dif bal-games of the Upper Thompson Indias. 3 Some of the Indians say that it never used to rain formerly; that is to say, 4 Their aunt's name was Naké'lis, and she is described as being an elk. ® Their meat or lunch for the journey consisted of four deers bladders flled with fit.   ent from the ordinary 
  the spEAt period.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 215 
Now, the sisters set out on their journey to their aunt's house, and after 
some days saw a house on the trail. The weather became cold, and the 
younger sister desired to enter the house to warm herself, The elder sister 
said, ‘Remember our brother's advice;” but the younger persisted, so they 
entered the house, in which they found Coyote, who was busy tanning skins. 
He treated them kindly and put on a large fire for them. He took some of 
his dried semen from under the prepuce, and, placing it in a dish, offered it to 
the sisters, saying, *You are no doubt hungry. Eat some fat.” The elder sister 
was suspicious, and threw some of it into the fire. When she saw that it did 
not burn like fat, but only crackled and smoked, she advised her sister not to 
cat of it; but the latter disobeyed, and as a result at once became pregnant. 
The sisters then continued their journey. When they were out of sight, 
Coyote took his underground lodge on his back, ran ahead farther along the 
trail, and, placing his house down, began to dress buckskin, as before. Again 
the women were forced to go inside (owing to Coyote making the weather 
very cold), when they were treated in the same manner as before. This was 
done four times by Coyote. The last time the younger sister was taken in 
travail, and the elder sister left her in Coyote’s house. On leaving, Coyote 
said to her, *If your sister has a female child, I will rear it; but if a male, 
I will hang it up in the branch of a tree.” 
The elder girl went on. Her aunt the Elk knew of her coming, and so 
did some of the other people. When the girl was about two days journey 
from her destination, Lynx sent Hare to meet her and fix camp for her that 
night. Hare ran very swiftly, and soon reached the spot where the girl would 
camp at sundown. Here he erected a brush lodge for her to sleep in, gathered 
fire-wood, and made a fire. Now, Lynx had told Hare not to be ashamed, 
but to wait for the girl in the lodge he should erect, and give her food when 
she arrived; but when Hare saw the girl approaching, he became bashful and 
ashamed: therefore he hung the meat on one of the lodge-poles and ran and 
hid himself. 
The girl arrived, and camped in the lodge for the night. Next morning 
Hare watched her from his hiding-place underneath a log. She continued 
her journey next morning, and, while stepping over the log which lay across 
the trail, Hare ran out from underneath and called her names, such as “red 
privates,” etc. The woman got angry and threw her root-digger at him, 
splitting his nose. This is the reason that the hare has such a peculiar nose 
and nostrils at the present day. When the girl came within sight of her aunt's house, the latter said to 
all the young men, “Run out and meet your cousin! Whoever reaches her 
first shall be her husband.” Then Grisly Bear, Black Bear, Wolf, Eagle, 
Humming-Bird, Puma, and all the other animals and birds except Coyote, 
Puma, also called Cougar, Panther, snd Mountain Lion (Felis concolor).  

----

216 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Lynx, Hare and Deer, ran to meet the girl. When they had run some little 
distance, Elk herself ran out, and, passing the others, reached the girl first. 
She took her niece home and watched carefully over her, so that none of the 
young men might see her. Nights she put her in a basket (szug), which she 
hung to the beams of the lodge immediately over her own bed-place. Lynx was displeased at not being able to see the girl, and made a hole 
in the roof of the underground house, and in the lid of the basket, and every night spat down on the girl when she was asleep, his spittle falling on her 
navel, and thus making her pregnant. Each morning the girl found her belly 
wet when she awoke, and informed her aunt, who assembled the people to 
find out who had done the mischief; but all the young men denied it. Before 
long the girl gave birth to a male child, but his father was still unknown. 
When the boy had grown to be of goodly size, Elk assembled the people, 
and asked all the men each to make a bow and arrow for the child, so that 
he might know who his father was. Coyote and Raven each claimed the 
lad; but Elk said they lied, and would not recognize either of them as his 
father. Lynx, who was afraid, sat leaning against the ladder of the under- 
ground house, and never said a word. All the men in turn handed their 
bows and arrows to the lad; but as he tried each of them, he threw them 
away. Coyote came with a finely-made bow and arrows ornamented with 
colored feathers; but they did not suit, and were thrown away like the rest. 
At last Lynx, who had been holding back, came forward and handed the 
boy a roughly-made bow and arrows made of firbranches. On taking hold 
of them, the lad was highly pleased, and fired many arrows. Thus Lynx 
was kwown to be the boy's father. 
Raven, Coyote, and some of the other men, were chagrined because they 
had not been able to prove themselves the father of the boy, and, as the 
people were dispersing, they beat Lynx, who was sitting at the bottom of 
the ladder. Raven kicked him in the face, and jumped on his head as he 
went up the ladder, thus disfiguring him, and causing Lynx's face to assume 
the shape it has at the present day. 
Elk and all the people were displeased because Lynx was the father of 
the boy, therefore they deserted the woman and the boy. When they had all 
gone, the woman bound up Lynx's wounds, and he became her husband. 
When Lynx became well again, he went out hunting, and gathered all 
the game together on one hill. Puma, Wolf, and all the best hunters of the 
people, could find no game, and a famine began to reign. Raven, who was 
nearly famished, returned to the village, and found the boy outside playing 
with a ring made out of deer-fat. He snatched up the ring and devoured it. 
The boy cried because of the loss of his ring; and his mother, running ouside, 
caught Raven by the throat, and choked him so hard that his entrails began 
to project from his anus. Then she let him go, and told him to lick his

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 217 
protruding guts. When he had done this, she invited him inside, and gave him meat to cat. He returned to the people’s camp, and told them that Lynx’s house was 
full of meat and fat: therefore all the famished people returned to the village, and were feasted by Lynx. He gave most meat and fat to those people who had formerly treated him kindly; but to Raven, Coyote, and others he gave very little.

----

II. — TRANSFORMER TALES 
10. Nspatce'tceit,! or The Four Black Bears; also called 
The Qwa'qtqwat. Brothers 
(Upper and Lower Uta'mgt) 
A man® who was a hunter lived in the mountains in the neighborhood 
of Brta'ni. He had two wives, who were Grisly Bear and Black Bear; and 
cach of his wives had four children. He paid most attention to the Black 
Bear wife; so the other became jealous, and made up her mind to get rid 
of her rival. One day she said to her husband, “I am. going to dig roots. 
Come along with me, so I may not feel lonely! You can do shooting at 
the same time.” He accompanied her, and hunted near by where she was 
digging. Towards sunset he returned to where she was. She said to him, 
“The sun is about setting It will soon be time for us to go home, but there is no hurry. Come here and lay your head on my lap. I will louse 
you” He did as requested. After picking over his head a little while and 
pretending to find many lice, the Grisly Bear wife said, *What a quantity 
you have! It is a wonder the wife you love so much does not louse you.” 
Then she bit him in the neck and killed him. She then cut off his genitalia, 
put them in her basket, and went home. Here she said to Black Bear, 
“Our husband went shooting and did not come back. I waited for him 
very long.” 
After dark she put her husband's genitalia in the ashes to roast. One 
of the young Black Bears saw it when she was raking the coals, and shouted, 
“She is baking my father's genitalia!” but the Grisly Bear made fun of the 
child, and peace was restored. After the meat was cooked, Grisly Bear arose from her bed and ate it. The next morning she said to Black Bear, “Let 
us go out and search for our husband.” About sunset she called Black Bear, and said, “It is useless for us to search any longer. We better go home to 
our children. But we have plenty of time. Come here and lay your head 
on my lap. I will louse you” Black Bear did as requested; and Grisly Bear, pretending to find many lice, said, “What a quantity you have! It is   
* Nopatcetceit means “black bear cub” or 4young black bear.” * Compare this story with the Upper Thompson stories in Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, “The Grisly sad the Black Bears” p. 60; *Qoaqiqat” p. 42; “Coyote and the Flood” p. 205 “Cukstana, of Coyoic's Dog” p. 30. 3 This man is seid by some to have been the smaller red-headed woodpecker. + Many Thompson Indians will not work or play outside afte the sun sets. They may meet with accident or harm (from ghost). 
[218]

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 219 
a wonder the husband who loves you so much does not louse you.” Then 
she bit her in the neck, killed her, and cut off her breasts. 
On arriving home, she said to Black Bear's children, *It is strange your 
mother has not arrived. She must have gone a long way, searching for her 
husband.” That night Grisly Bear baked the breasts; but one of Black Bear's 
children saw her, and shouted, “Oh, she is baking my mother's breasts!” but 
Grisly Bear made fun of the child, and said she was baking roots. 
Then she told her four children privately that she had killed her husband 
and his wife, and that she also wanted to kill Black Bear's four children. 
“When I go away to dig roots in the morning,” she told them, “say to 
Black Bear's children, ‘Let us play at feasting!’ Then set before them a 
basketful of nga’ux,! and induce them to eat heavily, so that they may lose 
their strength. Then say, ‘Let us go and swim; and when you get to the 
lake, suggest, ‘Let us play at wrestling.” They will be full, and you can 
easily overcome them and drown them. Then take their bodies home, and 
stick the youngest one on a stick to roast, for I shall be hungry when I 
come home. Be sure to follow my instructions, and eat very little of the 
ngauzx yourselves.” 
In the morning the young Grisly Bears did as told. The eldest Black 
Bear, however, became suspicious, and warned his brothers. They ate very 
little of the food given to them by the Grisly Bears; but the latter could not 
restrain their appetites, and ate until hardly able to move. The Grisly Bears 
then said, “Let us go and swim!” so they all went down to the lake ® and 
swam. They then suggested, “Let us play at wrestling.” The Black Bears 
agreed, and the two youngest commenced first. Grisly Bear, being glutted, 
was soon put under the water by Black Bear and drowned. The other 
Grislies became afraid; but the eldest Black Bear pulled the body to the 
bank, and said, “Your brother is all right. He will revive very soon. Let 
us continue our play” The next two then had a contest, resulting in the 
death of Grisly Bear, as before; and then the others wrestled, with the same 
result. The Black Bears then took the bodies of the Grisly Bears to the 
house, stuck the youngest one on a stick to roast, and laid the others in the 
place where the Black Bears themselves generally lay, covering them over 
with rotten wood and anthills, They then went as fast as possible along the 
trail * to the river. 
The mother Grisly Bear came home after dark, and, being hungry, at 
once began to eat the small bear on the spit, and was thus engaged when 
      
+ Nga'us consists of different kinds of food boiled together until thick. The commonest kind of nga'us consists of bitter-oot, service-berries and deer-fat boiled together (Upper Thompson). + Some say probably Bani . Said to be the tral from the Bini Valley to the mouth of the Thompsan River, — that generally used by the Lytton Indians at the present day. 
    28J8SUP NORTH PACIVIC EXFED., VOL. VIL,

----

220 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Meadow-Lark cried out from the top of the smoke-hole, “You are eating 
your own child!” She then looked, and recognized it by the claws. She 
flew into a rage, ran to where the Black Bears slept, to kill them, but found 
there her own children dead. She then started on the trail of the Black 
Bears, so as to overtake them before they reached the river; but the common 
Marmot? who lived in a house near the trail, detained her by inviting her 
to eat and by talking to her. He did this so that the young Black Bears 
should have more time. He asked her why she was in such a hurry; and, 
as she did not like to confess her errand, she answered that she was in no 
hurry, and stopped with him for a while. When she got out of his sight, 
she redoubled her speed, and overtook the young Black Bears a little distance 
from the river. They saw her coming, and ran up a tree. The Grisly Bear 
came to the foot of the tree, and said to them, “Your father and mother have 
come back, and have sent me to bring you home. Come down at once, as 
1 am anxious to return!” But the eldest Black Bear told her she lied, and 
advised the others not to go down. Then the Grisly Bear became angry, and 
said she would kill them, and began at once to bite the tree at the butt, in 
order to make it fall! When the tree was nearly falling, the eldest Black 
Bear said, “We will drop the youngest one down to you. Open your mouth 
wide.” Then, Grisly Bear leaned back and opened her mouth, and he threw 
down into her face dry rotten wood mixed with ants, choking and blinding her. 
The four brothers forthwith descended, and ran for the river. On arriving 
at the crossing, they saw their grandfather, S'qon&'qa (an old man who made 
canoes), patching his canoe. He came across to fetch them, and landed them 
safely on the other side. They told him their story, and said, “Grisly Bear 
will be here in a little while” As expected, Grisly Bear came, and called 
on S'qbne’qa to take her over. He took her into his canoe, and told her 
to sit down on an unpatched hole, so as to keep the water from coming in. 
They took a long time to cross; and the small fishes, one after another, 
began to nibble at Grisly Bear through this hole, biting off small pieces of 
her buttocks. When she would jump up, the canoe would fill with water; 
so S'qdng'qa would tell her to sit down again, or they would drown. Then 
the larger fishes, one after another, bit her and tore off big pieces of her 
flesh; and at last the sturgeon came along and took the last bite, pulling 
out her entrails. The result was, that when she landed, she fell down dead. 
Then the young Black Bear brothers, who were also called Qwa'tqwart 
or Qwa’qtkwar,® became endowed with magic, and travelled up the Thompson 
River. They carried their youngest brother on their backs; generally the one 
next in age to himself carried him. 
¥ Sematss's, the common or red marmot, not the hosry of mountain marmot. These aimals are not found in the Uttmqt country, but are pleotiful in the region of Nicola Valley and the adjoining countries. 2 Adult grisly besrs cannot climb trees. 2 Some say that thenceforth they were generally called Qua'tqwaLt; that is, ater they became transformers.  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 221 
They had not gone far when they saw a woman who had roasted a hare 
or rabbit (skilqi'tc, Lepus americanus), and was calling out, “Who will eat 
of my roast” They took her roast from her, and transformed her. 
Some distance above they saw another woman, who was crying out, 
“Who will copulate with me? The eldest brother, after putting a leaf in his mouth, which he chewed, went to copulate with her. He saw many 
human bones all around where she sat. Every man who had connection with her had died, because her privates consisted of a rattlesnake? He spat out 
the leaf he had chewed on her privates, and transformed her! saying, “Women shall not henceforth kill men when they have connection with them.” 
When they reached Mud-Slide, a place about four miles below Spences 
Bridge, they saw a Cannibal spearing fish? He was standing on the top of 
the cliff on the opposite side of the river. The youngest brother said, “I will 
play a trick on that fellow!” so he changed himself into a fish, and appeared 
in the water at the place where the Cannibal was standing. The latter 
speared him; but when he did so, the brother broke the linc which connected 
the spearhead with the handle, and disappeared with the spear-head. 
The cannibal was very much grieved at the loss of his spearhead, for 
it was made of copper; therefore he went home and lay down in a sulky fit 
Presently the four brothers came along, and, after greeting the Cannibal’s wife, showed her the spearhead. She recognized it, and told her husband, 
who was overjoyed at the thought of getting back his spear-head again. He 
ordered his wife to cook a meal for them. She did so, and, when ready, 
set before them a very small basket full of nga'uzx, giving them very large 
spoons of mountain-sheephorn to sup with. They laughed, and thought to 
finish the food at one spoonful, but were surprised to find themselves satisfied 
and the food apparently undiminished. The Cannibal then sat down and 
finished it at one mouthful. 
They then left; and above this place they crossed the river in a canoe 
made of horsetail (zxen), and camped on a small island underneath the 
mountain called Ca'nexanknemax.* They lighted a fire, and an altercation ensued 
between them as to which of the four was greatest in magic! After some 
contests, the youngest proved himself the strongest of the four; so the others, 
in revenge for their defeat, threw their youngest brother's head-band into the 
fire when he was asleep. The fire did not harm it, however; and when he 
awoke in the morning, he became wroth with his brothers for the trick they   
1 1t is supposed she was transformed into a stone, bot it is not known for certain, 2 There are no ratlesnakes in the Uma country, but they are plentiful in the Upper Thompson country. See Shuswap p. 650. 3 Sec Thompson Indians p. 42. 4 A rocky mountain mountain, 5,500 feet high, on the north side of the river (sbove sea-level), one mile below Speaces Bridge. See Thompson Indians p. 43.

----

222 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
had served him. So he caused a flood; and as the water of the river rose 
rapidly, his brothers became afraid, and sought refuge on the high mountain 
near by. As the waters gained on them, they made the mountain four times® 
higher; but still the waters rose, and eventually reached the top, so that they 
were in danger of drowning. Then they called on their brother to have 
mercy on them; and he stopped the flood, which gradually receded until the 
waters reached their normal level again. 
Now they continued their journey; and when they had arrived some 
distance above Spences Bridge, they saw an underground lodge and entered 
it. They found it occupied by Coyote, who was just in the act of cutting 
open his wife's belly to deliver her of her child? They stopped him, and 
asked him why he thus treated his wife. He said, “How can I do otherwise? 
If I do not take the child from the woman, it will die as well as its mother. 
1 have always done thus” He had been doing this to his wives when 
pregnant from time immemorial, thereby killing them, but rearing their 
daughters, which he afterwards married, and treated in like manner when 
they became heavy with child. Thus he had had his daughters as wives for 
many generations. The Black Bears said, “We will show you how to do.” 
One of them took a string, and, after wetting it, entered it through the 
woman's privates and attached it to the child. Then the brothers pulled, 
but the string broke. Next they took a strip of bird-cherry bark, and after 
softening it in water, attached it to the child. When they pulled, the child 
came forth in a natural manner. Then they said, “Women shall henceforth 
give birth to their children, and never require to have them taken out through 
their bellies.” 
Continuing their travels up the river, the brothers came to another under- 
ground house, which they entered. This house was also inhabited by Coyote,* 
who happened to be away at the time, gathering firewood. The brothers 
sat down inside; but, as the weather was rather chilly, they presently wished 
to have a fire. They looked in vain for any firewood in the lodge, but at 
last discovered a piece of wood with a knot-hole in it, which was covered 
over with a lot of robes. They split it up and made a fire with it. This 
piece of wood was Coyote’s wife. 
Now Coyote reached the top of the ladder with a pack of fire-wood. 
When the brothers were aware of his approach, they hid themselves. Coyote 
called out, “Wife, I have arrived! Help me down with my pack of fire- 
wood!” Then changing his voice, he said, “Husband, I am very comfortable 
here in bed. I do not care to get up.” Then he said in his natural voice, 
“Wife, do come and take down my pack of woods” and again changing his 
  
1 Each time the water reached them, they made the mountain as high again, until thus they had made it four times higher. ® See Shuswap p. 652.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 223 
voice, he answered for his wife, saying, “I do not care to get up. Let your 
pack drop down” Now he let the wood drop down, and entered the lodge 
himself. Immediately he went up to the bed where the heap of robes were 
to have connection with his wife, but found the piece of wood gone. He 
searched throughout the house, but, failing to find it, he sat down and wept. 
The brothers could not restrain themselves any longer, and laughed 
from their hiding-places. They said, “We will give you better wives than 
the one you had.” Borrowing an adze, they went to a bluff of trees near 
Dy, and, cutting a short piece of alder (kwitlp)® and a longer piece of cotton- 
wood (dloltcé'tcélp)* they fashioned them into the shape of women, and made 
them alive. Then they repaired to Coyotes house and said to him, “Your 
wives will be here presently.” Before long the short woman, who was of 
alder, entered the house without speaking, and closely following her came the 
tall woman of cottonwood, who said, “Ala”? as she reached the top of the 
ladder. The alder woman was of the Lower Fraser tribes,* and the cotton- 
wood woman of the Upper Thompson tribe, and they became Coyote’s wives.* 
The Black Bears then said, “Henceforth men shall have women for wives, 
and not knot-holes; and their offspring must marry one another, so the 
country may be peopled.” 
Continuing their journey, the brothers came to the Arrow country beyond 
Spences Bridge, and there the youngest one changed himself into a dog, with 
arrow-points for hair,® and an arrow-head of great sharpness for a tongue; and 
the other brothers made bows and arrows with stone points. The youngest 
said, “Shortly we shall come to a people? who wil fight us,” and he advised the others how to act. 
Soon they arrived at a group of several large underground houses 
inhabited by many people. Here they were treated kindly, and much food 
was placed before them and their dog. At night the people made each of 
the brothers sleep in a different house, and caused many young women to 
play and sleep with them; so that they became tired out, and eventually fell 
into a very deep sleep. When they were sound asleep, the people took the 
brothers’ arrows and changed the stone points, putting needles of the yellow 
pine (s'a'tkélp, Pinus ponderosa)® in their places. 
Next morning the brothers left the dog tied up near one of the houses, 
  
+ Common alder. 2 Common cottonwood or aspen poplar. 3 The Upper Thompson Indians and Shuswap always said *Alx™ when about to descend the ladder into, an underground house, The Utimqt and Lillooet, generally went dows without saying anything. 4 SWtcinko Indians of the Lower Fraser, from Yale down to the cost. 5 Compare this past of the story with part of the Upper Thompson story “Coyote and the Flood,” p. 20 and with the story of Qoagiqat. (Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 44) @ Compare this with the Upper Thompon story of *Coyote's Dog.” * Some say they may have been Shuswap. ® This does not grow in the Ut/mqt country.

----

224 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
and went out! walking over a prairie near the village. When they had 
passed over the prairie and were about to enter a forest, they were ambushed 
by a number of men concealed in the woods, and the elder brothers were 
shot. The other brother, finding his arrows useless, ran back towards the 
village, where the people were all gathered around and on the tops of the 
houses, watching the fight. Now, the brother who was running was loved by a girl of the village, 
and he knew she loved him; so he cried out to her to let the dog loose. 
She turned the dog loose, and at once he ran around, through and over each 
house; and the people, who were standing thickly, were all killed. Then he attacked the warriors who were pursuing his brother, and killed them all. 
Every one who was bitten by the dog or stabbed with his tongue, and all 
those who were touched or cut by his hair, died. Then they revived their two elder brothers who had been killed, and together they journeyed to the 
upper world. While travelling? there among the stars, they saw a Grisly 
Bear, and gave chase to him; but the eldest brother became afraid as they 
neared the bear, and hung back} saying, “I wish to defecate” Then they 
changed themselves into stars, saying, “We will be seen by all future gene- 
rations, who will tell our story.” Hence the one Grisly Bear, followed by 
the three Black Bear hunters and the dog, in the group of stars called the 
“Grisly Bear.” ¢ 
11. Child-of Hog-Fennel (Kokwe/lah: 
  (Lower Uta'mgt) 
There once lived a maiden in some place in the upper country * who 
went out to dig hog-fenncl roots (Peucedanum macrocarpum Nutt)! While 
digging, she took a fancy to a very large thick root, cohabited with it, and 
as a result became pregnant. Feeling ashamed of her condition, she left the 
people and erected a lodge some distance away, in which she lived. In due 
course she gave birth to a son, who, when he became old enough to use 
bow and arrows, asked his mother who his father was. He said, “I never 
see my father, and he never comes home.” She told him that his father fell 
in the rocks many years ago and was killed. Then he said, “I will have   
Some say the people asked them to go and gather materiel o make baskets. + Some sy while hustiog there. Hence the reson awigued for ane star being some distance behind the others 4 Thi is the constellation of the Dipper. + Kokwlahti or Kokwe/aFit bas the same meaning as kokowe'las skifsas vis, Schild ox ofpiog of Kolonela” Compare this story with the Liloet ane of Toatia (Traditions of the Thompson River Indisss, 5. 95) snd the Upper Thompson one (bid, p. 45). Some place In the country sbove that of the Uma, to the cast or mort. + This roo is wed 15 food by al the sonthern interior tribe of Brith Columbia. 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 225 
revenge on the rocks for killing my father.” So he went to the precipice 
and asked it why it slew his father; but the precipice answered, “Your mother 
has told you a lie. I never saw your father.” He returned home and told 
his mother what the cliff had said: so she told him that his father fell from 
a tree many years ago and was killed. He said, “I will have revenge on 
the trees” So he took his bow and arrows and went to interrogate the tree; but the latter answered, “I know nothing of your father. Your mother must 
have told you a lie” Returning, he told his mother what the tree had said. 
Then she told him that his father had been drowned in the river. He said, 
“Then I will have revenge on the water” Taking his bow and arrows, he 
went to kill the water for murdering his father; but the water said to him, 
“Those whom I kill I know, but your father I never saw. Your mother has 
told you a lie” Returning home, he told his mother what the water had 
said, and was very angry at her for telling him lies, but she was ashamed 
to tell him the truth. 
He left his mother and travelled over the country. Wherever he went, 
the hog-fennel plants shook their leaves with gladness; and when he trod 
near them, they embraced his legs. As he was jumping over a stream, Bull 
head Catfish (tsena’tz) saw him, and cried out, *Nkokwe'laht/it!” He turned 
back three times to look for the person who had called him names. On 
searching the fourth time, he found him, and was going to kill him, but, 
changing his mind, he transformed him into the bullhead catfish and threw 
him into the water, saying, “You shall be the catfish, and shall never again 
call people names.” 
Now he thought he knew who his father was, and, returning to his 
mother, he asked her if the hog-fennel root was his father. She acknowledged 
having had intercourse with the hog-fennel root, and told him that it was his 
father. Then he killed her,' and said, “Henceforth women shall not have 
intercourse or be made pregnant by roots.” Now, Child-of-Hog-Fennel travelled over the country again, and did many 
wonderful things. He travelled as far down as the upper borders of the 
Uta'mqt country, whence he turned back. At last he came to a large river, 
where very many people lived. He staid with these people four nights, and 
cach morning on awaking found his belly wet. He told the people? who 
assembled all the women, and asked which of them had slept with the stranger. 
They all denied having had any intercourse with him. It was noticed that 
Frog was absent. Presently she came in, and they asked her the same 
question. She answered, “Yes, I visited him, and I wish to marry him.” 
The people said, “No, we cannot allow you to become the wife of so great 
a man. He must have a better and a prettier wife than you” Then all the   
1 Some aid that he wransformed her 2 Some say he told the chief 
  a stone.

----

226 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
people crossed the river, deserting Frog. They gave the finest young woman 
of all the people to be the wife of Child-of-Hog-Fenncl. Next night, when 
Child-of Hog-Fennel was sleeping with his bride, Frog gathered herself up! 
and, jumping across the river at one bound, alighted on Child-of-Hog-Fennel's 
face. Frog stuck there,’ and the people tried in vain to get her off, although 
they pulled and scraped very hard. Thus Child-of-Hog-Fennel, who had been 
a very handsome man, became disfigured for life. 
Some time after this the people wished to make a moon, for hitherto 
there had been no moon, and they thought they would have a light at night 
somewhat similar to the sun. They asked Coyote to be the moon, and he 
consented. The first night he arose in the evening; and as he passed over- head, each time that he saw a married couple having sexual intercourse, he 
cried out, “Ha! you are in the act of having sexual intercourse!’ (“Ua’xep 
ip katix!") The people were displeased at his thus taking notice of their actions, and said, “He will always insult us thus” Therefore they deposed 
him, and asked Child-of-Hog-Fennel to take his place. He assented to their 
proposal and became the moon. He conducted himself properly and did his 
work well, therefore the people agreed that he should always be the moon; 
and thus he continues to be at the present day. The frog may still be seen 
as dark spots on his face 
  12. The Transformer. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A man came up the Fraser River from the lower part of the S'a'tcinko 
country. He was known as a transformer, and visited all parts of the valley 
where people resided. Those people who were bad, and did not pray, he changed into stones, birds, and animals. When the people heard that he 
was coming, they began to pray diligently, and gathered together for the 
purpose of holding religious dances. They addressed the Transformer himself 
in their prayers and dances. 
One man who was engaged making a canoe would not pray. He said, 
“I have no time to pray, I am too busy;" so he kept on working at his 
canoe. He was busily engaged at his work one day when the Transformer 
appeared to him, but the canoemaker did not know who he was. The 
former said, “My friend, I see you are busy. Where arc the rest of the people” The canoe-maker answered, Oh, they are all over there, praying. 
They expect a man from below of whom they are afraid. I don't believe 
1 Gathered herself together or drew berelf up for a spring. > They say that Frog fitened out on bis face like a large spa of gress. 3 See Thompson Indisas, p. 91. 4 1 could not learn any proper name for this man. He was simply called Kéx-so'iem (4he who transforms”).  

----

‘TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 227 
such things myself, and have got no time to pray, because I want to finish my canoe” The Transformer said, “You have got a nice adze. Let me 
see it" So the canocmaker handed it to him. Then he pushed it against the man's nose, and at once he was changed into a woodpecker, and flew 
up into a tree, which he began to strike with his beak, as he had previously 
done to the canoe with his adze. 
He passed by the people he saw praying, and proceeded to the next 
band up the river. Here he came upon a man who was engaged in grinding 
to a point a stone about six inches in length, probably a stone knife or 
dagger. He asked the man what he was doing; and the latter, not knowing 
him, answered, ‘I am making a weapon to kill Transformer with when he 
appears” Transformer said, “It looks very nice. Let me see it!” After looking at it, he said, “You ought to have this on your head” At the same 
time he pushed it against one side of the man’s head, and the man became 
transformed into a deer with antlers. Then he drove him away, and said to 
him, “You shall never again make weapons to kill any person with.” 
The Transformer continued on his way, and, reaching a point about one 
mile west of Vale, he saw a man with a dog chasing an elk on the south 
side of the river. The elk took to the stream, and had almost crossed to 
the northern bank when he transformed all three into stones, which may be 
seen to this day. The place where this happened is called Ntétlixa'tkotis 
stexa'ts (“where the elk stands in the water’). When he arrived near the 
borders of the Uta'mqt country, at the canyon known as Tsaxalfs, he saw 
people on the opposite bank of the river who were catching salmon with 
their hands. In places where the rocks were high, they suspended boys by holding their feet. When the boys caught a fish with their hands, they 
pulled the boys and fish up together. They did not seem to be, able to 
catch many in this manner. The Transformer was sorry for these people, 
and said to himself, “They have no fishing-utensils, I will try to help them.” 
So he sat down and began to think. There was a rock in front of him, 
and he scratched it with his finger-nails. With each scratch a thought came 
into the heads of the people, and they gained knowledge. After the first 
scratch, they said to one another, “Let us make twine” After the next, 
they said, “Let us make nets!” and so on with cach scratch until they had 
obtained the whole knowledge of catching and curing salmon as the Indians 
do at the present day. After the people had learned everything, and had 
begun to catch fish in the proper way, he showed them all the best places 
for the purpose; and the Indians have always used these fishing-places or 
stations since that time. 
When the Transformer arrived near a place a few miles above Yale, 
called Bam! he met a man of large stature, whose feet sank in the rocks 
Seid 10 be thes males and half above Vale,   
'29~JESUP NOKTH PACIFIC ¥XPED., VOL. VII.

----

228 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
as he walked. He changed him into a stone, which may be seen a little 
east of that place. This man’s foot-prints, and also the scratches in the rock 
which the Transformer made when teaching the people how to fish, may be 
seen at the present day. 
Some distance farther up the river, at a place called Huxtsi’xama, he 
saw a woman who was in the act of giving birth to a child. He turnnd her 
and her child into stone. 
When he reached a place about half a mile below Spuzzum, called 
Zolpipx (“little leha'l”), he saw some people playing lehal. One man, who 
had gambled away his dog, was in the act of holding his gambling-bone 
behind his back, and had his face turned towards his two wives, who were 
sitting near by, when the Transformer turned them all into stone. 
At Spuzzum he met Good-Man or Great-Chief,! who was on his way 
down the river. He it was who created people or who made them good. 
It is not known what became of either of them after they met; but it is 
supposed that the Chief went back to the interior, while the Transformer went 
back to the mouth of Fraser River. 
13. The Great Chief. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A great man or chief came from above! He was endowed with great 
powers of magic, and travelled through the country putting everything right. 
At each place he came to he divided the people, separating the good from 
the bad. The former he scattered over the country, locating certain families 
in certain places; and the Indians are descended from these people. He 
located the people as he went along. The bad people he found in the country 
he killed or transformed into animals and rocks. There were some people who lived near Fort Yale, at a place called 
Xafit. They had four or morc large seats or blocks shaped like trunks, on 
which they used to sit. He turned these into stones, which may be seen 
there at the present day. There was also at this place a man of very large 
stature, whom he transformed into stone, and he may be seen at the present 
day lying on his back. If it is hot weather, the people repair to these stones 
and rub them, and immediately the weather turns cloudy; and if the weather 
is rainy, they do the same thing, and it at once turns sunny.   
1 Probably the same personage as OMd-Man or Great.Chief of the Upper Thompsons. 2 They have mo tradition ss to what became of this man, nor exactly wheace he came, except that it was (rom the Upper Thompson country or some way above. Some say they thiak he was an old man; others, that he may have been God, the God of the whites.

----

III. — OTHER ORIGIN MYTHS. 
14. The Mosquito and the Thunder. 
(Lower Uta'mqt) 
Their version of the story is exactly the same as Tale 11, “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” p. 56. 
15. The Moon and his Younger Sister. 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
Their version of this story is exactly the same as Tale 36, “Traditions 
of the Thompson River Indians,” p. 91, the only difference being that the 
sister is the Frog, and not the Hare. 
16. The People who never slept. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
At one time the people who inhabited some underground lodges near 
Spuzzum never slept. They thought that sleep was death; and when a person 
fell asleep, thinking he was dead, they at once took him outside and buried 
him. At last a woman’ from another place married one of these people, 
and, seeing what they did with their sleeping friends, she said to them, *Why 
do you thus kill your friends? If you leave them until daylight, they will 
come to life again. They are only asleep.” This was tried, and, being proved 
to be true, the people hencefort slept at night. 
17. Beaver and Eagle; or, The Origin of Fire 
(Upper and Lower Uta'mgt) 
In the beginning the people were without fire, and had to depend alto- 
gether on the sun for cooking their food. At that time the sun was very 
much hotter than it is now, and people were able to cook their food by 
holding it up to the sun, or by spreading it under the sun's rays? This, 
  
+ Some say she belonged to the upper course of Thompson River. 2 Compare No. 57 of this volume. Upper Thompson Rirer, 3 This belief is also entertained by the Upper Thompson Indisas, although not mestioned in any of their myths. The Nkamterngmuy say that long ago, when the sup was very hot, food was cooked by being hung in the sun, spread under its rays, and held up i front of it. It is also said that they seat messages to the sun, and prayed to it when they wished food cooked. Thi, of course, was before the knowledge of fire was obtained. 
[229]  

----

230 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
however, was not so good as fire; and Beaver and Eagle determined they would find out if there was any fire in the world, and obtain it, if possible, for the people. They trained themselves in the mountains until they became full of “mystery,” and through their magic were able to look over all the world, even to its edges. They discovered that there was fire in a lodge at Lytton, so they laid their plans accordingly. They left their home at the mouth of the Fraser,' and journeyed up that river until they arrived at Lytton. 
[The rest of this story is the same? as in Tale 12, “Traditions of the Thompson River 
Indians,” p. 56. 
18. Beaver and the Frogs (A Flood Myth). 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
Not very far from Beaver's house were situated, close together, three 
other underground houses! These were inhabited by three women — Bush- 
Tailed Rat, the common Mouse, and Frog — and their children. Beaver 
wished to marry Frog's daughter, and visited her house one day to make 
arrangements with her mother; but the latter rejected him, and called him by many nasty names, such as “short-belly,” “broad-posterior,” etc. Beaver 
went home feeling very angry, and prepared to take vengeance, on Frog. 
He said to Rat and Mouse, “Leave your houses and move back into the mountains, for 1 intend to have revenge on Frog.” Some time after they 
had gone, he went outside and sang and danced. Then it commenced to 
rain, and the creeks and rivers rose so, that all the country was flooded. 
Frog and her family were washed out of their house, and carried away by 
the stream. As she drifted past where Beaver was singing, she implored him 
for help, and asked him to bring a canoe to her; but he answered, “Go 
inside your own privates, and use them for a canoe” The Frogs were scattered over the whole earth; and when the flood receded, they were left 
here and there in all the lakes throughout the mountains. This is the reason 
that we find frogs in all the lakes and streams at the present day, even on 
high mountains. 
19. The Bad Boy; or, The Sun and the Lad. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
Once there was a boy who was noted for his bad temper. He was so 
disobedient and evil-tempered, that the people could do nothing with him; 
  
1 Some say the sea coast near the mouth of the Fraser. © The Beaver was killed by beiog speared with a beaver-spear. On the north side of Spuszum Creek, but nearer the Fraser River than Beaver's house. There ace a umber of sites of very old underground houses at this place. # Some say he wished to marry the Frog herself, and that the three women were widows.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 231 
therefore they proposed to desert him. While he was away in a patch of 
bushes playing, the people packed up their goods and left. Upon his return, 
the boy found the houses all deserted, and began to search for the people. 
He heard whistling in the woods all around, and, thinking the people were 
hiding, and playing some joke on him, he hurried from one place to another 
(whereever he heard a whistle) until he became completely wearied. For the purpose of misleading the boy, in case he might overtake them, the people, 
before leaving, had spat on the ground, broke wind, urinated, and defecated 
on the ground in different places all around; and their spittle, wind, urine, 
and excrement had whistled until dry, thus misleading the boy. 
[The rest of the story is exactly the same as Tale 7, “Traditions of the Thompson River 
Indians,” p. 51, except the following additional.'] 
The four blankets were of rat-skins, mouse-skins, bluejay-skins, and magpie- 
skins respectively. When the lad gave Sun his blankets, he made him promise to be cooler. 
Before that, Sun was very hot. 
20. The War of the Fishes! 
(Upper and Lower Uta'mgt.) 
Formerly the Indians lived at Lytton, the Animals in the Nicola country, 
and the Fishes in the Uta'mqt and S'a‘tclnko countries. A number of Salmon went up in a canoe to visit the people of Lytton. 
When they were returning, Humpback-Salmon stole a girl from that place. 
Next year the Fishes said, Let us conduct her* to Lytton” so they all 
accompanied the bride and her husband on their visit to her relatives. Mean- 
while the Animals had heard of the arrival of the Fishes at Lytton, so Marten, 
Fisher, Wolverene, Lynx, Fox, and many others, went there with the intention 
of stealing Salmon’s wife. The Fishes tarried a long time at Lytton, and 
the woman gave birth to a son there. One night the Fishes were playing lchal with the Lytton people; and 
some of the Animals, starting a very large fire, made the lodge so hot, that 
the women had to go outside to cool themselves. Humpback-Salmon said, 
“Do not make the place so hot, your sisters are sweating" but the animals 
paid no attention to what he said, and put on more wood. When Salmon's 
wife went outside, she was seized by some of the animals who were lying 
in wait, and carried off by them to the Nicola country. When the Fishes 
  
* Among the NkamicinEmuy the boy has the name Sle. 2 Compare this story with Tele 26, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 77. 3 Along the Lower Fraser River, — al the country below Lytton. 4 Okahiits a conducting ceremony. The bride or bridegroom is escorted on a retar       
  it to their parents.

----

232 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
discovered that the woman had been stolen, they returned home, leaving her 
child at Lytton. 
Now, the Fishes desired to recover the woman, therefore the next year 
they’ all went on a war-expedition against the Animals, most of whom lived 
in the neighborhood of Nicola Lake. When they reached that place, they 
gave battle to the Animals, but were speedily vanquished and put to flight. 
Many of them were killed on the spot, and others were overtaken and slain 
before they could get out of the Nicola Valley. Their bodies were all thrown 
into the lakes and streams of that country. This is said to be the reason 
why most kinds of fishes are found in the streams and lakes in Nicola at the 
present day. The animals continued the pursuit of their enemies, and over- 
took the Sockeye or Red Salmon at the mouth ‘of the Nicola River, where 
they slew him, and threw his body into the Thompson River. This, they 
say, is why the red salmon runs up the Thompson River, but seldom or 
never up the Nicola. They continued the pursuit as far as the mouth of the 
Thompson at Lytton, where they overtook and killed Sturgeon, and threw 
his body into the Fraser River. This, they say, accounts for the sturgeon 
frequenting the Fraser River, and not the Thompson. Dog-Salmon alone, of 
all the Fishes, escaped, and he has ever since been afraid to leave the lower 
country. This is said to be the reason why the dog-salmon does not ascend 
the Fraser River above the canyon. Most of them do not even ascend so 
far as the canyon, but run in the river below Hope and Yale. It is said it 
is afraid to venture back again to the upper country from whence it was 
chased. 
‘When Humpback-Salmon’s son grew to be a man, he left Lytton and 
went on a visit to his relatives in the Fish country. Here he learned the 
full story of the slaughter of his father and the other Fishes, so he determined 
to have revenge and to rescue his mother. Returning to Lytton, he proceeded 
to the Nicola country, where he found his mother at Nicola Lake. Some of 
the Animals treated him kindly enough; but others, especially Badger, talked 
very rudely to him, and told him if he did not leave, they would kill him. 
He got angry at this treatment, and one day fought with the Animals, killing 
Badger, Grisly Bear, and many others. He took his mother back to Lytton, 
where they afterwards lived.   
1 Some say the SWtclako country, others the Ut'mgt country.

----

IV. — ANIMAL TALES. 
21. Swamp-Robin! 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A number of people lived with Thunder in the upper world, or sky land, one of whom was Swamp-Robin (S'xoyrk). One day she said, “I wish to see 
the face of my step-mother, Thunder. Wy don’t I see it? Why does she 
withhold * her face from me?” Next day she brought fire-wood for her elder 
brother* It was branches of cedar she brought; and when she put them on 
the fire and they burned, sparks flew around. One of the sparks alighted on Thunder, who turned her face round towards Swamp-Robin, and immedi- 
ately lightning flashed. When she saw Thunder's face and her large aquiline 
nose, she fainted. Then Thunder said, “Drop my step-daughter down!” So 
the people dropped her down on the earth; and Thunder said to her, “You 
shall be Swamp-Robin. Whenever you are thirsty, cry loudly, and I will 
send you rain to quench your thirst; and if anyone mocks you, I will thunder 
and lighten.” 
Swamp-Robin ‘wandered around, and one day met Raven, who asked her 
where she came from. She answered, “I came from above. Iam of Thunder's 
family.” Raven laughed at her, and said, “You came from above! How 
could a thing like you come from above?’ and made fun of her. Swamp-Robin 
was sorrowful and wept because Raven did not believe her, but only mocked 
her. Then it thundered and lightened, and Raven was afraid and believed 
what Swamp-Robin said. 
22. Skunk.® 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
Skunk pretended to be sorrowful, and wept. He said to his wife, “I 
am sorrowful. Cook much nga’uz, roots, and fish, that my guests may have 
plenty to eat” Then he asked all the people to come and see him, and all 
his younger brothers the animals repaired to his house. Grisly Bear, Fisher, Marten, Wolf, Wolverene, all went. When they had all assembled, he   
+ S'soyrk is a bird called by some people the Swamp-Robia. 2 Some say Thunder always hid her face from the people. 3 Some say that perhaps Raiabow. was her elder brother. 4 This, they say, is the reason why, if the Swaamp-Robin cals loudly i hot weather it wil rin before: very long. + Compare with the Skuak stories fn Tradiions of the Thompson River Tndiaas, pp. $860. 
[233]

----

234 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
addressed them thus: “I think of our dead parents, who were slaughtered by 
our enemies, and my heart is sorrowful. 1 think of our parents’ slaughter as 
yet unavenged, and my heart is sorrowful. I propose that we go to war to 
Sis¢’tama,' and that we avenge ourselves on the Sis¢’tamux * for the slaughter 
of our parénts.” The animals agreed to Skunk’s proposal, and forthwith they all started 
on the warpath. Skunk acted as their war-chief and guide. After travelling 
many days, they arrived at the edge of some steep hills looking down on a 
valley which was filled with smoke. Skunk said, “We are now looking down 
on the country of our enemies. The smoke we sce is from their fires, for 
there are many lodges. It will not be wise for us to attack them at once. 
If you stay here, I will go and reconnoiter.” Leaving them, he descended 
into the valley, and was soon lost sight of in the smoke. He repaired to 
the bank of the river wich flowed through the valley, and there he picked 
up many dead dog-salmon® He cut off their heads, and placed them in a 
row. Then he opened their mouths and commanded them to bark like dogs. 
When he had gone a little distance away, they all barked like dogs. Then 
Grisly Bear said to the other animals, “The enemy's dogs have detected our 
brother,” and on Skunk’s arrival asked him if he had been detected. He 
answered, “No! but there are many people, and it would be useless for us 
to attack them until daybreak.” 
Now, there was a large pit there which had been used for trapping, 
and Skunk proposed that all the animals should hide in it until daybreak. 
He said, “You may all sleep; for I shall watch and wake you before day- 
break” So all the animals went into the pit to sleep, — the large animals 
in the bottom, and the smaller ones on the top, — so the pit was quite full. 
Just before daylight, seeing that all the animals were asleep, Skunk excreted 
his obnoxious fluid over them, thus killing them for the time being. Then, 
leaving them for dead, he went home. 
‘When near the village, he defecated, and turned his excrement into a 
boy, to whom he said, “Zéfa'muk’® The boy answered, *Popokin, tik 
splantkin”® Skunk, being annoyed at this answer, said, “Ze! #'ta ltd, 
  
1 Said to be the name of a conatry the location of which was unknown, bat was supposed by some 10 be the Siictako country (Lower Fraser River). * The name of their enemies, the people that ishabited the Sisttama country. A tribal division of the Shuswap are called Situs. Their habitat is on the west side of the Fraser River, near the mouth of the Chilcotin River. 3 Dogesalmon are confined to the lower part of the Fraser River, below Spuzzum, in the Stelako country. 4 Pits were used for trapping deer sad other animals by the S'icinko, Lower Lillooet, and perhaps other tribes. Some, in telling this story, say that it was not a pit that the apimals hid in, but simply & hollow in the grot § This word is like & childs from of speech, Children, when learaiog to talk, generally use for sf. The proper word would be s/a'ut, which means Wart art thou?" © This is also a child's way of talking. It means *1 am fart, T sma skunk.” 
   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 235 
sesd'utkin tik sis?tamurkin’} but the boy answered, “I am the excrement 
of Skunk.” After drilling him for a while, Skunk managed to get the boy 
to answer his question, saying, “I am a Sist'tamuy slave.” 
Continuing his journey with the boy, they reached the village. The 
people wondered at Skunk returning without his brothers, and gathered around 
him to hear the news. When the people had all assembled, Skunk addressed 
them, saying, “I alone survive of our numerous war-party. We attacked the 
Sist’tamuy, and had a fierce fight- My brothers the animals were all slain, 
and 1 alone was able to escape. As I fled, I saw this boy who got separated from his people in the fight, and I made a slave of him.” 
Then he called his brother's wives together to give them more particular information regarding the fight. He said, “Your husbands are all dead, there- fore you become my wives, and I become your husband.” Then he asked each ‘one of the women to come forward, and he would point out the parts of the body where her husband was wounded. He placed his finger on her brow, and said, “Your husband was hit here; then on her nose, saying, “He 
was hit here;” then on her mouth, chin, throat, and each part of her body, 
until he placed his finger on her privates, saying, “He was hit here. Oh! my finger went in” Then the woman, feeling ashamed, went over to his 
part of the house.” He did this with all the animals’ wives, and they thus 
became his wives. Some of the people, however, were suspicious of Skunk, 
so they asked the boy what he was. He answered, *Spopo'4in.” They said, 
“What do you say” Then the boy said, “Sis?/amuzkin.” This made the 
people still more suspicious; and some of them said, “Skunk lies. He has 
disposed of his friends in some manner, and this boy he has made out of 
something.” 
Skunk was well pleased now, for he had many wives; but his joys did 
not last long, for a few days afterwards all the warriors * appeared, descending 
the hillside in Indian file. The people saw them coming, and sent out some 
young men to find out who they were. The warriors asked if Skunk had 
returned; and the young men said, “Yes! He said you were killed, and he 
has taken all your wives to himself” When Skunk heard that the warriors 
had returned, he told the wives to go back to their respective husbands’ 
houses; but many of them would not go. Some said, “You have shamed 
us, we cannot go back’ and others said, “Why should we go back when 
our husbands are dead?” 
The warriors were very wroth at Skunk, and attacked his house. They 
killed all the women inside, and also Skunk's boy. When they struck the 
latter, he turned into excrement. Skunk himself was sorely wounded, and   
| This is also rather a child's way of talking. 7w/a ought to be fre. Children use ¢ for fe. The sentence means (7%, interjection showing displeasure), “Say thus, L am a slave, I am 4 Sisttamuy.” 2 The animals had all revived after Skunks smell had died away. 
30—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED, VOL. VIL,

----

236 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
stabbed in many parts of the body. He cried out, You may as well dispose of me now, and kill me outright. Put me in a szug® and throw me into 
the river” They did with him as directed; and when they threw him into 
the river, they transformed him and cursed him, saying, ‘Henceforth you shall only be the animal the skunk, and you shall never again be able to 
betray your friends or to steal their wives. You shall be shunned by all 
men and animals because of your odor.” Skunk floated down the river in 
the basket, and got ashore in the S'a'teinko country, where he remained. 
Therefore skunks are very plentiful in that country at the present day. 
23. Fisher's Wife; or Marten and Fisher.* 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A wealthy woman lived in a certain part of the country, and had Crow 
as a slave. No other people lived near by, and at that time men were very 
scarce in the land. Crow was desirous of marrying his mistress; but, being 
afraid to make proposals to her, he thought of a scheme which he hoped 
would delude her and bring about the desired result. He began to stay away 
from home some nights, until it became a frequent occurrence and his mistress 
thought nothing of it. He had in the mean time made a canoe and placed limbs of trees in it, which he shaped to look like people, and also made a 
large blanket of long white moss. 
One dark night, after painting himself to look different from usual and 
donning his blanket, he embarked in his dug-out canoe and paddled for the 
woman's house. Having reached there, he entered, and pretended he was a 
wealthy stranger who had come to ask her in marriage. She consented, and 
at his request took off all her clothes. He gave her his moss blanket to put on, and conducted her to the canoe. He said, “These are my slaves in the 
canoe, and they will paddle us to my house, where you will be very happy.” 
When they had embarked, he pushed the canoe from shore, and told the 
pretended people (or limbs) to paddle out to his house. Then he lay down 
with his former mistress and had repeated connection with her throughout 
the night, while the canoe kept drifting down the stream. He was afraid the 
woman would discover the deception as soon as it became daylight: so, just 
about break of day, he opened her legs, pretending he wished to have con- 
nection with her again, and defecated in between. After he had done this, 
he flew up on the branch of a tree near the river's edge. Then the woman 
knew the deception which had been practised on her, and cursed him, saying, 
“You shall henceforth be a crow, and shall never again be able to deceive women.” 
  
TA large oblong or square shaped basket with 1d. * See Shuswap, p. 673.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 237 
Crow had taken the paddle with him when he flew away, so she drifted helplessly downstream. She asked feathers of the birds as they flew overhead, 
and they let them drop down into the canoe; but none of them were stiff 
enough to paddle with. At last a flock of ducks flew overhead, and she asked them to help her. They let a feather drop, and she was able to paddle 
ashore with it. She was now a long distance from home, and without food 
or clothing. Seeing a hole in the ground, she gathered some moss, and, 
putting it in the bottom of the hole, sat down on it. Thus she had shelter 
and concealment. She had not been there long when she saw a deer feeding 
near by. So she made a snare out of green willow switches, which she 
twisted to make them pliable ‘and strong, and, setting the snare in the deer’s 
trail, she soon captured it. She split a stone in two, and used the pieces as 
knives to cut up and skin the deer with. Having thus obtained plenty of 
food, she now set to work and made more snares of withes and of deer-hide, 
and caught many deer. She tanned their skins, and made herself plenty of 
clothing; she also made kettles and other vessels of bark, and constructed 
an underground house, in which she took up her abode. 
Now, unknown to her there was another underground house at no great 
distance, which was inhabited by two brothers, — Fisher and Marten! The 
former went hunting one day, and on departing told his brother, who generally 
staid at home and did the housework, if he saw any pretty bird or animal 
approach the house, not to shoot at it. After he had gone, a Woodpecker? 
entered the house. When Marten saw it, he said to himself, “Its scalp would 
make a fine ornament for my brothers quiver.” So he began shooting arrows 
at it, but he could not hit it; and the bird went hopping away up the ladder 
and outside. He followed, shooting at it, and was surprised that, although 
he shot at it so often, yet he could not hit it. It took him away some 
distance, and then, as he fired the last arrow, it disappeared near the ladder 
of an underground house. He was astonished to see an underground house 
at this place; but, as his arrow had struck the ladder, he went up to pull it 
out. As he was doing this, the woman said from inside, “Come down and 
see mel” So he went inside. She handed to him, across the fire, a mat 
with some fat in it, saying, “Here is something to eat! Take a good hold 
of it in case it falls into the fire” As he took a firm grip of the mat, she 
jerked it back, and drew him into the fire, where he was severy burned. She carried him outside and left him there. He crawled to the water, and, 
after washing himself, managed to reach home. When his brother came 
back, he said, “You see how you have fared through disobeying me. What 
shall I put on your burns?” He answered, “Put on my marten-skin quiver.” 
    
+ Xeolina is applied in this story as a personal name for Marten; #¥xbms is the ordinary name for a 
2 Timil'peim is a variety of woodpecker with bright plumage.

----

238 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Fisher cut up the quiver and glued it on to Marten; but it was not quite 
sufficient to cover all his body — a piece was left uncovered at his throat 
where the white spot of the marten is at the present day. This is said to 
be the reason why the marten has a white spot on its throat at the present 
day. If the skin. of the quiver had been large enough to cover Marten, 
martens would now have no white spots on their throats. 
Next day they waited until Woodpecker should arrive again. As soon 
as he appeared, they shot arrows at him, but were unable to hit him. They 
kept shooting at him without success until he reached the entrance of the 
underground house, where an arrow from Fisher killed it; but when they went 
to pull out the arrow, they found they had only shot some excrement. 
Now the woman invited them inside, and they entered. She offered them 
some fat to eat, and handed it in a mat to them across the fire, at the same 
time asking them to take a firm hold of it. Fisher took it, and, as the 
woman pulled back, he let go, so she fell on her back, with her legs up in 
the air. Then Fisher jumped on top of her, and had sexual intercourse with 
her; but Marten threw carth at her privates, and called her nasty names. 
She agreed to become Fisher's wife and to go to their house next day. 
As Fisher was going hunting next morning, he told Marten, when his 
wife came, to treat her kindly, give her good meat to eat, and a nice soft 
skin for a robe, and another for an apron or kilt. Instead of doing this, 
however, he gave her sinew to eat, and a badly-dressed skin of his own to 
make her clothes out of. When Fisher came home, he changed these for 
well-dressed soft skins of his own manufacture. He made her comfortable, 
and they lived happily together; while Marten did all the heavy work, and 
fetched all the wood and water. 
Fisher said to him, “My wife must on no account go to fetch water. 
When she wants water, you must fetch it for her.” So Marten did as directed, 
and always fetched water; but he did not like his brother's wife much, and 
often mocked and made fun of her, and called her names when he whistled. 
One day he was whistling the words “red privates” in derision of the woman, 
when Fisher heard him, and asked him what he was saying. He answered, 
“I was just whistling, and saying that it was fine weather.” 
After some time the woman bore a son to Fisher, and the boy grew rapidly. 
One day Marten got lazy and would not fetch water, so the woman went for 
it herself. When she reached the watering-place, she put her child down beside 
the water-buckets, and, taking off her clothes, she went into the water to bathe. 
A large fish appeared swimming around, and then disappeared. It was the king 
or Tyhee salmon (kwora), and he went ashore and changed himself into a man. 
‘Then he addressed her from the shore, saying, “I have wished to see you for 
a long time, and have now come for you to become my wife” She was 
struck with his handsome appearance, and consented to go with him.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 239 
When Fisher came home, his wife was not there; so he asked Marten 
where she was, and, receiving an evasive answer, he at once repaired to the 
watering-place, where he found the boy crying beside the buckets and clothes 
of his mother. He took the boy home, and told Marten that the salmon 
had taken the woman. Then Fisher changed the boy into a horse-fly,! and 
sent him to find out where his mother was. 
The boy arrived at the country of the Fishes® down below, where there 
were many people and many canoes. In one place he saw four underground 
houses, and entered them one after another. In the last one he found his 
mother. The people in the house watched him as he buzzed around, and 
said, “That fly acts strangely.” He passed by his mother's car, and whispered 
to her that her husband would come for her; then he flew out of the house, 
and back to his father, who after the boy had told him all he had seen 
changed him into a boy again. 
Then Fisher caught a fawn, and took it to the boy to play with; he 
also made miniature bow and arrows for him to shoot the fawn with. They 
went outside and watched the boy one day until evening playing at shooting 
the fawn until he got tired and fell asleep. Fisher said, “We will leave the 
boy. He is all right, and will not ery when he misses us.” So they left 
food and water with him in the house, and, entering their canoe, they paddled 
away to the country of the Fishes. When they got near to the four houses, 
they hid their canoe in the bushes, and travelled on foot. They met the 
sisters of King-Salmon carrying loads of wild crab-apples ® (éwoa’s), and singing 
as they went along, the words of their song being “Our elder brother pos- 
sesses the wife of Tcintupus”¢ They stopped them, and questioned them 
regarding their brother's house, — in what part of it they slept and sat, how 
they acted when they entered, and what they usually did when at home. 
Having gained all the desired information from the sisters, they took hold of 
them by their noses, and, shaking them violently, their bones fell out. Then 
they put on the women's skins, and, taking the loads of crab-apples on their 
backs, they went down to the water's edge, where they found the women's 
canoe, in which they embarked. As they paddled along, they sang the same 
song that the sisters had been singing. 
Before long they came to a beach where many canoes were hauled up, 
and, seeing Rat and Mouse near by, they told them who they were, and 
offered to pay them if they would make holes in all the people's canoes that 
night. They agreed to do this, and after dark the Rats and Mice made 
holes in the bottoms of all the canoes excepting the women's canoe that 
Marten and Fisher had been using. 
  
+ Some say into a bluchotley. * Some say in the Swtclako country. 3 Wild crab-apples are plentiful in the S''tcloko country, and some also grow in the Lower Utk'mqt country. 4 Meaning doubiful, but supposed to be a personal bam or & nickname for Fisher. ©   
 

----

240 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
In the evening, Fisher and his brother walked up to King-Salmon’s house 
with their loads of crab-apples. After depositing their burdens, they entered, and jumped from the foot of the ladder to the floor. In doing this, Marten 
fell short; and the people noticed it, and said, “It is strange our sister cannot jump tonight” They went up to the same corner in which the sisters had 
been wont to sleep. The people talked with them, and soon noticed that 
one of thém (Marten) had a different voice from the woman he impersonated, 
while the other (Fisher) one’s voice was exactly like that of the elder sister. 
It was partly dark inside the house, and no person noticed anything different 
about them excepting Raven, whose suspicions were aroused, and who detected 
a white spot on Marten’s throat, and asked how it came to be there. They answered that it was caused by too much singing. Then he noticed that one 
of them had a very large nose, with no skin along the bridge, and that pitch 
had been rubbed over the place to hide it. He said, “How is it your nose 
is larger than formerly, and you have pitch daubed on it? One of them 
answered, “My sister was picking apples, when a branch fell down and 
bruised and skinned her nose so that it swelled, and I rubbed pitch on it to 
make it heal.” 
Some time after dark they escorted the new wife of King-Salmon to the 
water to bathe herself, as this had been the duty of the sisters since their 
brother obtained his wife. They carried torches, and Raven watched them 
from a distance. They told the woman who they were, and asked her to 
play with King-Salmon, so that he might feel tired and sleep soundly. After 
washing themselves, they all returned to the house, and soon every one 
retired for the night. The woman played with King-Salmon a long time; 
and the people said, “It is very strange our brother's wife is so full of fun 
to-night, she was wont to be very quiet.” 
About midnight, when King-Salmon was sound asleep, Fisher rose up 
quietly, and, taking his knife, cut off Salmon’s head. Then all three, steathily 
leaving the house, hastened to the canoe, carrying Salmon’s head along with 
them. At daybreak Raven discovered that King-Salmon had been murdered, 
and that the woman had fled. He awakened the people, and they all started 
in pursuit. When they reached the canoes, they found they had all been 
holed except one small one, which had escaped the notice of the Rats and 
Mice. In this the people embarked and gave chase, and soon began to overtake 
the fugitives, who, when they reached the place where they had hidden their 
own canoe, embarked in it, and broke up the women's canoe which they had 
been using. But still their pursuers gained on them, for Salmon’s head made 
them heavy. When they saw they would soon be overtaken, they threw the 
head overboard, and soon began to leave their pursuers behind. When the 
latter reached the place where the head had been thrown into the water, 
they began to dive for it; but none of them could dive deep enough. At

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 241 
last Loon dived and brought it up. They took it home and put it on the 
body of King-Salmon, who then became alive again. 
Their canoe being light, the two brothers and the woman soon left the 
Fish country far behind. As they were paddling along, they saw a Wolf in 
the forest, near the water's edge, but he soon ran away out of sight. The 
woman was so fascinated by Wolf, that she said to the men, “Let me go 
ashore to pick crab-apples.” They let her ashore, and she picked crab-apples, 
while they remained in the canoe. Soon she disappeared in the woods, and, 
after some time, they called for her, but received no answer. Then Fisher 
said to Marten, “Take the canoe home and look after my son. I will follow 
my wife, and bring her back.” Then he went ashore, and followed the tracks 
of Wolf and the woman to Wolf's house. 
On the following day he saw his wife alone gathering fire-wood, and 
talked with her. Next day he changed himself into a small boy, and his wife 
took him home on the top of her load of firewood and told the people she 
had found him in the woods, and she wished to rear him as her son. Every 
day the Wolves went hunting; and only their father, a very old man, was 
left at home. Fisher grew surprisingly fast, and soon was almost a man. 
The Wolves said, “We will soon make him hunt for us;" but he killed them 
all one night, and took his wife home to his own house. 
24. Tapped-his-Legs (Tski-¢'laxatém). 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
The people all lived in four underground houses.* They included Beaver 
and many others, among them Raven. It was winter-time, and although they 
all hunted, they had been unable to kill any game for a long time, and would 
have starved had it not been for Beaver, who provided food for them by spearing fish through a hole in the ice. 
One day, while Beaver was fishing as usual, all the other men being 
away hunting, Raven appeared and strutted around in a boastful manner. He wore a necklace of fresh knee-bones of the deer strung on a string alter- 
nately with pieces of deerfat. He went out on the ice where Beaver was 
spearing, and tapped his toes with his beak. Then, after using insulting 
language to him, and making fun of the people because they could not find 
any deer, he flew away. 
When the hunters came home, Beaver told them of Raven's visit, and 
they made up their minds to stay at home and watch to see if he came the 
next day; and they put the small screech-owl (s7@’gug) on the top of a pole 
to watch. Towards evening Raven appeared, and acted in a similar way to   
+ Literally, (he) tapped his legs (or feet)” * Probably near Spuszum.

----

242 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
what he had the day before. When he flew away, they all watched him to 
see in what direction he would disappear; but their eyes all watered; and 
only the small screech-owl, whose eyes did not water, was able to see where 
he alighted. 
Next day they all started in the direction in which the small screech-owl 
had seen him disappear, and, when near the place, heard the sound of sticks 
breaking, and of people laughing and talking. On reconnoitring, they found 
it was Bluejay and Pinejay (or Butcher-Bird) gathering wood. They had long 
poles with hooked ends, with which they were breaking the dry branches off 
the large trees. They surrounded them, took them prisoners, and made them 
give all the information they possessed about the people with whom they 
lived. They said they were servants of these people, and did all the work, 
such as gathering firewood, carrying water, dressing skins, cooking, etc. 
After asking them particularly ‘about how they acted when af home and when 
engaged in their various duties, they took them by their noses, and, shaking 
them, their bones fell out. 
Then two of the people went inside of Bluejay's and Pinejay's skins. The 
man that went inside of Bluejay’s skin had a larger nose than the latter, and 
the skin was not sufficient to cover it all: so he rubbed pitch over his nose 
to hide the place. The rest of the people hid close by, while the other two 
who were to impersonate Blucjay and Pinejay took their loads of wood on 
their backs and went towards the house. 
Acriving there, they threw down their loads of wood, but, in doing so, 
one of them made a great noise. Raven said, *You were not wont to place 
your loads of wood down in that manner.” Then they went to fetch water. 
When they came back, Raven said to the one who impersonated Blucjay, 
“You talk differently” and the latter answered, “Yes, I have a cold and am 
hoarse.” Then Raven said, “And you have pitch on your nose.” — “Yes,” 
he answered, “a stick which I was breaking fell down and skinned my nose, 
so I rubbed pitch on the wound.” 
These answers seemed to satisfy Raven; he sent them to pound a skin 
(with scrapers). While they were yet engaged at this, he told them to give 
him the tongs and basket, because he was going to boil meat. Afterwards 
he took the stones out of the basket with the tongs, and gave them to his 
servants to cool them in their hands before putting them away. They were 
not used to this, and, although the stones burned their hands, yet they kept 
a straight face. 
When they had all eaten their meal of boiled deer-meat, Fisher said, 
“I think we better all go to sleep;” so Raven told them to go to bed. They 
went and lay down in the place where Bluejay and Pinejay had told them 
they usually slept. 
The inhabitants of the house were Raven, Fisher, Marten, Wolverene,

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 243 
and Lynx (besides formerly their two servants Bluejay and Pinejay). Their 
house was a long building made of logs and brush, and was partitioned across 
the middle with poles. In one end the people lived; while in the other end they kept the deer, which they had by their magic gathered up and confined 
in their house. In the nighttime the two men arose and turned loose all 
the deer. Then they changed these people into the animals they are at the 
present day, at the same time saying, *The Deer shall nevermore be gathered 
into one place and corralled by any man's magic, but shall henceforth be 
distributed here and there over the the country; and you people shall never 
more have the power to gather deer together at your pleasure, nor cven to 
hunt them with success, but shall henceforth live by stealing meat and game 
killed or left by hunters.” 
25a. Battle of the Birds. 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
A girl left the people for the purpose of marrying the Golden-Eagle 
(hala)? On the way to her intended husband's house she met Bald-headed 
Eagle on a log crossing a stream. He would not let her pass. She said, 
“Uncle, let me pass!” but he answered, “I have no niece.” Then she said, 
“Elder brother, let me pass!” but he answered, “I have no younger sister.” 
She addressed him by all the terms of relationship one after another, but he 
always answered her in a similar manner. At last she said, “Husband, let 
me pass!” Then he answered, “Wife, why did you not address me thus 
before?” She could not get away from him, therefore she accompanied him 
to his house, and became his wife. He lived in an underground lodge alone, 
but in another underground lodge near by lived all the birds with their elder 
brother Golden-Eagle. The latter did not know that Bald-Headed Eagle had 
stolen his sweetheart. One night the birds were unable to make a fire in their lodge, so Golden- 
Eagle sent one of the small birds to procure a light from Bald-Headed Eagle. 
The bird procured the light, but on the way back put it out, and, entering 
the house, went and lay down. He was sorrowful and would not talk, because 
he had seen his elder brothers intended wife in Bald-Head's house. Then 
Golden-Eagle sent another bird for a light, but he did likewise, for he was 
ashamed when he saw the woman in possession of Bald-Head. Then Golden 
Eagle sent another bird, with the same result. The people wondered what 
was the matter, that every messenger acted thus. Then Bluejay went, looked 
in and saw the woman. He returned and said to Golden-Eagle, “Your   
1 Compare tis story with Tale 20, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 67. * Halt, species of eagle, — the was eagle or the golden cagle. The tailfeathers of the male bird were valued very highly by the diss. 
3U—JHSUP NORTH FACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VII

----

244 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
younger brothers saw your intended wife in Bald-Headed Eagle's house, there- 
fore they act thus.” 
The Birds made up their minds to take the woman, and laid their plans 
accordingly. They went over to Bald-Head's house and engaged him in a game of lchal. While they were playing, Bluejay put much wood on the 
fire, so the place became very hot. The woman went outside to cool her- 
self; and Golden-Eagle and fei'xfciixt} who were waiting outside, at once 
led her to their house, where she became the wife of Golden-Eagle. Bald- 
Head was very wroth when he learned the trick that had been played on 
him: therefore next morning he donned his collar of white birch-bark, went 
to Golden-Eagle’s house, and challenged the Birds. Golden-Eagle sent the 
Birds out one at a time to fight him, the weaker and smaller ones first. 
The woman painted the face and combed the hair of each Bird before he 
went out to battle, but Bald-Head killed each one in turn after a very brief 
contest. Now there were only three left. Then the /a'fakat® went out, but 
after a severe fight he was killed. Next Golden-Eagle went out himself, 
and engaged his enemy. After a severe and protracted struggle, he was 
killed; but he had managed to break the bark armor of his antagonist, so 
his neck was now unprotected. The woman wept when she saw that her 
husband had been killed. Last of all, the f/x tciixt went out. After a long 
fight, he managed to kill and behead Bald-Headed Eagle, but he was badly 
wounded himself in the encounter. Then the woman bound up the /7'z-tcizf's 
wounds and asked him to put the heads on all the other Birds. He went 
outside, and, passing by the head of each of the Birds in turn, their heads 
jumped back to their bodies, and they came to life again. They sat up and 
scratched their heads, saying, “We must have been asleep a long time.” He 
did not pass by the head of Bald-Headed Eagle, therefore the latter remained 
dead where he was. 
Some time after this the woman bore a son to GoldenEagle. When 
the boy grew up, he asked continually to sce his grandparents: thercfore Golden-Eagle told his wife to take him on a visit to her parents. After she 
had started on her journey, the head of the dead Eagle followed her, and 
at night crawled up her vagina. Next day, as she was travelling along, she 
saw a band of deer? on a hill close by. She said, “If there were only a 
man here to kill them!” Then Eagle’s head came out of her privates, and 
said, “I am a man, and will kill the deer for you. Wipe me with your hand.” 
She wiped him as directed, and he rolled over the ground to the deer, and, 
entering the buttocks of one after the other, killed them all. Then, rolling 
back again, he entered the woman as before.   
V Tefetcist, a large species of hawk. I don't know the English name. The Indians say it is the best 
fighter of birds. 2 Ha'tahar, x species of large hawk. + Some say there was only one deer.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 245 
After some days the woman reached her parents’ house, and shortly 
afterwards gave birth to two young Bald-Headed Eaglets shaped like eggs. 
These followed her wherever she went. She was desirous of getting rid of 
her egg-children, and also of Eagle's head, which continually went out from 
and came in to her vagina; so she asked her brother's advice. He told her 
to sweat-bathe, and went himself and prepared a sweathouse for her. When 
his sister entered, he made the place very hot with steam, and the eggs and 
head burst. Then they took the head and transformed it, saying, “You shall 
henceforth be an ordinary bald-headed eagle, and shall never again be able 
to enter woman's privates or make her pregnant.” 
256. Battle of the Birds. 
(Upper Uta'mgt) 
A woman and her sister lived together in a certain country, and in the 
neighboring country were many men who all lived in two underground lodges. 
In one lodge lived Bald-Headed Eagle, Fish-Hawk, and most of the small 
birds and waterfowl, while the other lodge was occupied by the Golden-Eagle 
(hala'n), Chicken-Hawk, Owl, and all the land birds of prey. 
One day the woman was washing herself in a stream, and Bald-Headed 
Eagle, happening to see her, approached her and asked her to become his 
wife. She consented, and accompanied him back to his house. . When Golden- 
Eagle and the Hawks, etc., learned that their neighbors had a woman in their 
house, they made up their minds to steal her. Next night they visited Bald- 
Head's house and engaged the occupants in a game of lehal. Some of them 
put a great deal of additional fuel on the fire, and made the house so hot 
that the woman had to go outside to cool herself. As she was on her way 
to the creek to wash herself, Golden-Eagle pounced on her and carried her 
off to his lodge. Next morning Bald-Headed Eagle repaired with all his followers to the 
house of Golden-Eagle, and challenged the occupants to fight. Then all the 
inmates, headed by Golden-Eagle, came forth and gave them battle. Now a 
very sanguinary engagement took place, and all the birds on both sides were 
slain, excepting fcf'x-titxt, who alone remained alive. Being the only survivor 
of the conflict, he claimed the woman as his wife; but she did not care for 
him, and afterwards ran away from him. As she passed over the battlefield, 
she saw the dead body of Bald-Headed Eagle on the ground, and urinated 
on his head? Continuing her journey towards her sister's house, she became 
aware that she was pregnant, and shortly afterwards gave birth to two eggs   
1 See Shuswap, p. 634. 2 Some say that she also urinated on the head of FishHawk; and when she gave bisth to the eggs, one resembled the head of Bald-Headed Eagle, and the other that of FishHawk.

----

246 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
which resembled Bald-Headed Eagle's head. These rolled after her as she 
walked. On arriving at the lodge of her sister, the latter asked her what 
these eggs were that followed her. She answered, “These are my children.” 
Then her sister threw them into the fire, and they burst. 
Now, after the woman had deserted him, the #f'z-tciizt felt very lonely, 
therefore he put the head of each bird back again on its body, and they all 
became alive again. 
26. Wren (Tsetso').! 
(Upper and Lower Uta'mgt.) 
The people of the upper world (or sky country) stole the wife of Swan, 
who was very angry at this outrage and called all the people of the earth to 
a council. They agreed to make war on the Sky people, and, under the 
direction of Swan, they all gathered together with their bows and arrows. 
Then they fired arrows at the sky, but all their arrows fell short. 
After they had all tried it, Wren fired an arrow. The people watched 
it ascend until lost to view; but, although they waited for some time, it never 
came down again. It had stuck in the sky. Then Wren fired another arrow, 
which also disappeared and did not come down again. It had stuck in the 
nock of the first one. After he had fired many arrows, the people at last 
saw the arrows sticking one in the end of the other, like a chain suspended 
from the sky. 
‘Wren continued firing arrows with the same result, until at last the 
arrow-chain reached the earth. Then all the people ascended one behind 
another over the chain of arrows, and, entering * the upper world, they fought 
the Sky people, some of whom consisted of Grislies, Black Bears, and Elks. 
A great battle was fought, in which the Sky people were victorious, and the 
Earth people began to retreat in great haste down over the chain of arrows. 
‘When about half the people had reached the bottom, the chain broke in the 
middle, and many were killed by the fall. Others, who were on the chain 
above where it broke, had to ascend again, and were either killed or made 
prisoners by the Sky people. Those who reached the earth represent the 
people, animals, birds, and fishes to be found on the earth at the present 
day. There were formerly other different animals and birds on the earth, 
but they either were killed in this war or remain in the sky to this day.   
© A slightly different version of this story is also current among the Lytton snd Fraser River bands, Boss, Sagen p. 17. See Shuswap, p. 749. 2 Some say they tore a hole in the sky alongside the place where the fist arrow had struck.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 247 
27. Hare and Grisly Bear! 
(Upper Utimgt) 
Hare lived with his old grandmother in an underground lodge on one 
side of a large river, while on the other side lived Grisly Bear and her family. 
One day Hare was engaged making a double-pointed dagger (néatci'ntin)* 
of stone; and Grisly Bear, coming along, asked him what he was doing. 
He said, “I am making a toy to play with” Grisly Bear little knew that 
he intended to use the weapon on her. 
Hare was hard up for food, so he went across the river one night and 
stole Grisly Bear's stores of dried salmon. He carried them home and buried 
them underneath the floor of his lodge. Grisly Bear suspected Hare of the 
theft, so she visited his lodge to sce if she could find any trace of the stolen 
provisions. Hare sat down on the top of the hole he had the fish in, so 
that Grisly Bear might not see that the earth had been disturbed there. 
Grisly Bear staid a while in the lodge, conversing with Hare, who was engaged 
filing his double-pointed dagger to a sharp point; but, as she did not see 
any trace of the stolen property in the lodge, she prepared to leave. Just 
as she was leaving, Hare said to her, “Why did you say that I should sell 
my head-band of hare-skin to my nieces or aunts to wear when making 
baskets?” Grisly Bear denied the charge, and Hare called her a liar, and she 
retorted by calling him a thief and accusing him of stealing her dried fish. 
Thus they quarrelled, and then they fought. Hare was much quicker 
than Grisly Bear, and stabbed her often with his weapon, while he always 
managed to evade her blows. At last he got out of breath, and called on 
his grandmother to throw the pitch-wood into the fire, because Grisly Bear 
was getting the better of him. The old woman did as directed, and the 
house became filled with smoke. Now Grisly Bear could hardly see or breathe, 
and Hare soon despatched her with his weapon. He skinned her and hung 
up the carcass. The following night he crossed the river and murdered all 
her children except one that managed to escape. 
Some time afterwards Hare told his grandmother to wash herself, to comb 
her hair, and to paint her face. Then, taking a fancy to her, he had sexual 
intercouse with her, which killed her. Some time afterwards he was sitting 
on the top of his lodge, when Duck flew by. He asked her if she had any 
news, to which she answered in the negative. Next day she flew by again, 
and he asked her the same question. On the fourth day he repeated his   
+ Compare this story with No. 19, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 66. * This dagger had a handhold in the middle, It was used as a weapon of was, but is said to have been originally or principally used, for killing bear by placing it perpendicularly in the animal's mouth, and allowing it 0 close its jaws on the points. The litersl meaning of the name is “thing for placing in the mouth.” 
 

----

248 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
query; and Duck, who was annoyed at his repeated questions, answered, 
“Yes, I have news. Hare had sexual intercourse with his old grandmother 
and killed her” Hare was ashamed, and went down into his lodge without 
speaking. 
28. Bluejay (Kwd'kskwa or Kauw&'yaats). 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A man called Bluejay (Kwd'kskwa or Kauwéyaats?) lived with his two 
nephews. Their forefathers and all their relatives had been killed by a 
numerous people, who were theif enemies. Bluejay made his nephews train 
themselves as warriors; and when he thought they were proficient, he said 
to them, “Train yourselves for four days longer, and then we will take the 
warpath against our enemies, who have killed all our people. We will fight 
our forefathers’ enemies, and will avenge the slaughter of our relatives. We 
will need all our skill and ‘mystery, because our enemies are numerous, 
watchful, and warlike.” 
Then Bluejay tied his hair in a knot on the top of his head, and sat 
down, never moving for four days. At the end of that time, all three started 
for the enemies’ country, which was distant, and situated on the farther side 
of a large river and a lake. The people who lived there were the Elks, 
Grislies, Deer, Goats, Bighorn-Sheep,* and other animals; and these were all 
their enemies. Grisly and Elk were scouts, and constantly roamed through 
the hills between Blucjay's country and their own, so as to guard against 
surprise, and to intercept any war-parties which might venture thither. Bluejay 
and his nephews, however, managed to avoid the scouts, and at last reached 
the river. Here he told his companions to wait while he tried the river. He walked into the water and disappeared, but before long emerged on the 
other side. He had walked across the bottom of the river. Then he returned 
the same way, and, giving his ncphews a stick to hold on to, while he held 
the other end himself, they entered the river, and, walking along the bottom 
under water, at last safely reached the opposite bank. When they came 
within sight of the lake, Bluejay told his nephews to sit down while he went 
to reconnoitre. 
As he reached the lake, a large man with very long hair emerged from 
the water. Bluejay struck him with his spear, and the man at once sank 
into the lake, dragging after him the spear and Blucjay, who would not let 
go. Then the waters of the lake became agitated and muddy, for the man 
and Blucjay were fighting at the bottom. At last Bluejay killed the man,   
! This name is evidently derived from the word Kauwya, which is the ordinary term for the bluejay. Kauwe'yaats is the name for the blacjay in the Uma dialect. 2 Some say that this land was inhabited by all the animals, and that it was called the “land of animals.”

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 249 
and drew the body out on the sandy lakeshore. Then he sang and danced 
around the body of his victim because of his victory. He called on his 
nephews to come; and when they arrived, he cut off the man’s scalp. Then 
they took the hair of the scalp and tied some of it to their spears, to the 
handles of their knives, and to the heads of their arrows. 
At last they came within sight of the abode of their enemies. It was a 
large, long house of stone, situated at the bottom of a high cliff, and it had 
three doors. They hid themselves until near day-break next morning, when 
they made an attack and burst in the doors. Bluejay entered by the middle 
door, while his nephews entered by the two end ones. They took the people 
by surprise and killed a great many, but the survivors soon armed themselves 
and drove the intruders out. The two nephews were slain, and Blucjay had 
to flee for his life. His pursuers rapidly gained on him, and he took refuge in the middle of a thicket of bushes. Here he was surrounded. Some of 
the people began to cut down the bushes,’ while others kept thrusting at him 
with their spears between the bushes. In his extremity he called? on the 
bird bluejay to help him. The bird came to his rescue, and, attacking the 
enemy fiercely, made them take flight. They fled to the cliffs for safety. Then Bluejay and the bird revived the nephews by walking past their heads 
or jumping over their bodies. They came to life again, and said, ‘We must 
have slept a long time!” But Bluejay said, “Yes! you have been asleep, 
have you, why? you were dead and we have brought you to life again.” 
After this they all started on their journey home. As soon as they had 
safely passed beyond the boundaries of the enemies’ country, the bird blucjay 
left them. The others continued their journey, and when near home, Bluejay 
said, “Let us go hunting! You go up over that hillside and look for game, 
while 1 will go in this other direction.” To this proposition the nephews 
assented, and accordingly they separated. They went up over opposite hill- 
sides; but before they had ascended very far, they turned around towards 
cach other, and tried to transform each other. In this they succeeded at 
last; for Bluejay changed his nephews into wolves, saying, “You shall be 
wolves and hunt all your days, and your offspring shall always be wolves and 
shall always hunt.” The nephews changed Blucjay into a bird, saying, “You 
and your offspring shall always be blucjays, and you shall never be able to 
kill game by hunting, but will always have to depend on what you can steal, and on the refuse of game left by hunters.”   
1 Some say the bushes were cut by the enemy thrusting their spears at Bluciay. 2 Some say he prayed to Blusjay to come to his aid.

----

V. — HERO TALES. 
20. Xe'niax. 
(Lower Uta'mqt) 
An old woman lived with her two granddaughters, — the elder named 
We'latck, and the younger Stata’ga. She taught them how to make baskets, 
and how to perform all sorts of work required by women. The younger one 
was an apt pupil, and soon learned to do all sorts of work well; but the 
elder one was careless, and never learned to make anything properly. There 
was thus a great difference between the two girls’ handwork. One day the 
grandmother said to the girls, “I have been rearing you carefully, and teaching 
you, so as to fit you to become useful wives. Before long I shall send you 
to a distant country to marry two brothers, who are great men, and hunters.” 
We'latck was glad at this news, but Stata’ga said nothing. 
Some fime after this the grandmother told the girls that the time had 
arrived when they should go to their husbands. She said, “The brothers 
you are to marry are Owl and Eagle, who live in a house to the east (or up the river)! She directed them how to find the place, and said, “When 
you enter the house, you will see the hairy legs of Owl below, and the legs 
of Eagle above their respective places, like rainbows. The younger one of 
you will sit down under Eagle's legs, and the elder under Owl's legs. You 
will also find your husbands’ fierce dogs tied up outside the house; but if you 
throw the medicine on them that I give you, they will become tame and let 
you pass.” 
Now, the girls started on their journey, each of them carrying a large 
basketful of dried roots and berries. When they reached the house, they 
found the four dogs ticd outside. They were Rattlesnake, Grisly Bear, Black 
Bear, and Wolf. They were very fierce, and wished to attack the women 
but the latter threw medicine into their mouths, so that they could not bite 
and became tame. When they entered the underground house, they saw the 
legs or pictures® of Owl low down on one side, and that of Eagle higher 
up on the other side; so We'latck sat down in Owl's place, and Stata’ga in 
Eagle's place. 
The men were out hunting, but they had not waited long before they   
¥ Said to be probably in the Upper Thompson Indian country. 2 There sre no ratlesakes in the Uti'mqt country. They are almost altogether confined to the Nkam- teapmus and Oksnagon territories. Tt is said that these sigs like rainbows, called the “legs of the owl and eagle,” were probably some. Kind of stsdg (picture, paiating, or decoration) above their respective sleeping:places. 
[250]

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 251 
heard the girls coming. Owl was walking ahead crying like an owl, and 
saying, “Some one sits in our house.” We'atck became afraid, and wished 
to sit down beside her sister; but the latter told her to stay where she was 
and keep quiet. Owl, entering, sat beside his wife; and Eagle, following, went to his place, and sat down beside Stata’ga. Owl boiled some venison; but 
it could not be eaten, as he had killed a very poor deer, and the meat was 
extremely tough. Then Eagle boiled some of his venison, which was very 
nice and tender, because he had killed a fat deer. Now, Owl's wife took 
roots from her pack and made soup)! but it was so thin and watery that it 
was unfit to be eaten. Then Eagle's wife took roots from her pack and also 
made soup; and it was very good, because she knew how to cook it properly. 
Thus the women staid with their husbands for many months. They always 
fed the dogs, and, when doing so, used to jump over them: so the dogs 
eventually became quite gentle, and very fond of the women. 
After a time both women gave birth to children. Owl's child was a frog, and Eagle's a boy. Now their husbands went hunting, and did not 
return: so, after two days and two nights had elapsed, their wives became 
very anxious about them, and prepared to go in search of them. They had been taken by a woman called Xe'niax, who lived in the mountains and stole 
men. She is described as having no hair at all on her head or on any part 
of her body. Any men she captured became powerless, weak, and indolent: 
so they would neither hunt nor work, nor did they have any ambition to 
help themselves, or desire left to escape.’ 
After making a miniature fawn, bow and arrows, for Eagle's son to 
play with during their absence, and leaving food and water with him, the 
women departed, taking the Frog along with them. His mother carried him 
on her back. At last they struck the trail of the woman and her prisoners, 
and followed it up. Owl had plucked the feathers out of his body one by 
one, and dropped them as they went along for a sign. When he had finished all his feathers, Eagle had done likewise with his, so they followed the track 
easily. Coming to a lake, they saw the line of eagles’ feathers right across: 
so they placed the Frog in the water, and, getting on his back, they crossed 
over. They followed the feathers until they came to the top of a very steep cliff, where they saw Xe'niax’s house. They entered and found it filled with 
men who were mostly lying down. Those she had captured recently were 
nearest to her, and the oldest ones farthest away. They were thus in rotation 
according to time of capture, — those she had captured first being at the 
far end of the row, and those of recent date nearest to her, — the latest   
1 Nyaus, a sort of thick soup, generally made of roots, berries, snd fat, bailed together. 2 Jt is supposed she captured men by seducing them; and as soon as they had intercourse with her, they became utterly helpless sad altogether in her power, losing all their energy; and as long as they were within Ber spel, they had no desire to leave her. 
32JESUP NORTH PACINIC EXPED., VOL. Vil.

----

252 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
captive having to sleep beside her until she caught the next one. Owl and 
the Eagle were lying one on each side of her. 
After placing the Frog at the edge of the cliff to help them, they attacked 
Xe'niax. They had a fierce struggle, and several times were shoved to the 
edge of the cliff by Xe'niax; but the Frog pushed them back again. Xe'niax 
had killed women before, who had come after their husbands, by throwing 
them over the cliff. The fourth time, as they struggled near the edge of the cliff, the Frog gave Xe'niax a shove, and she fell over to the bottom. 
Thinking that she was killed, the wives rushed in and told the men to make ready to depart, for they had killed Xeniax; but they were just putting on 
their moccasins when she appeared quite unharmed after the fall. The wives staid there three days, and each day they fought with Xeniax, 
but each time with like results. On the fourth day Xe'niax said to the women, 
“What nice long hair you have! I wish I had hair like you!” She had no 
hair on her head whatever. They answered, “We make our own hair. It 
is a very simple matter, and we can soon make some for you quite as long 
and thick as our own.” Xe'niax at once accepted the offer, as she was very 
anxious to have hair on her head, and was envious of the women's long 
tresses. The sisters said, “Fetch in four stones and some pitch! and we will 
soon make plenty of hair for you” When she had brought the stones and 
pitch, the women lighted a fire and heated the stones red-hot. They told her to lie down and smeared her head with the pitch. Now one sister held 
her head up, while the other one put a red-hot stone on top of her head. The melting pitch ran down over Xe'niax's face and neck, and she began to 
wince; but they told her to remain quiet, for her hair was already starting to grow. The woman who was holding her let her own hair fall down on 
Xe'niax’s shoulders, and asked her to feel how long her hair and grown 
already. When the second red-hot stone was put on, Xe'niax began to 
struggle; but they told her to keep quiet and not to move. The woman 
who was holding her let her own hair reach down to Xeniax's waist, and, 
asking her to fecl of it, said, “See how long your hair has become! Another 
stone, and it will reach your heels” Xc'niax was satisfied, and lay still. 
Then they put on the third stone, which burned right through the crown of 
her head; and immediately afterwards the fourth one, which burned through 
and dropped into her inside, so that she died. They threw her body over 
the cliff, and pronounced judgment on her, saying, “Hereafter you shall only 
be an ‘earth mystery’ (tazad’imuz)? and shall never again be able to seduce 
and steal men.” 
Then the women went gathering roots, and feasted all the men, who   
+ Gum from trees. A sort of mystery or spirit, more or less harmful, which inhabits certain parts of the country, especially mountains; a haunted place.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 253 
afterwards went to their respective homes; but some of them who had been with Xe'niax many years, found, on reaching home, that several generations 
had passed during their absence. The husbands went back with their wives 
to their house, and followed their usual avocation of hunting. Eagle's child began to cry for his grandmother: so the father asked the 
women if they had a mother, to which they answered in the affirmative, so 
he told them to take the boy back to their country to see his grandmother. 
He said, “On your way back you will come to where the trail divides. 
Take the ordinary one, and avoid the one painted red, because it will lead 
you to a country inhabited by bad people and cannibals.” The women started off on their journey, Stata’ga carrying the boy, and 
her sister carrying the Frog. When they came to where the trail divided, 
they had a dispute as to which was the trail they had been told to follow, 
and eventually set out on the red trail. After travelling some distance, they 
came to a house inhabited by uncanny people (raza)! These people shoved 
them into a large copper kettle, and put them on the fire to boil. The 
cannibals left them there to cook, and retired for the night, expecting to cat 
them for breakfast next morning. The Frog was lowermost in the kettle, 
and made a hole in the bottom, through which he urinated on the fire, so 
that it went out underneath the kettle, and they did not boil. At midnight 
they came out of the kettle and fled. ) 
Next morning the cannibals, finding they had escaped, gave chase, and 
soon came up with them on a piece of open, flat ground. When they saw 
they were nearly overtaken, We'latck said to the Frog, “Have you no pubic 
hair?* He said “No, have you any? She answered, “Yes, I have four.” 
He said, “Give them to me.” So his mother gave him the four hairs, which 
he threw on the ground, and at once there sprang up four large yellow-pine 
trees (Pinus ponderosa)! close together. They all climbed up into one of these; and the cannibals, reaching the bottom, at once began to chop it down. 
When it was nearly down, they jumped into the branches of the second one, 
and the cannibals began to chop it down also. 
In the mean time the four dogs at the hunter's house began to growl 
and show their teeth, and strained at their halters: so the husbands, thinking 
that something must be wrong and the women in danger, let them loose, 
and they went bounding away to the rescue, Rattlesnake rattling as he went. 
They reached the spot just as the cannibals had nearly gotten the fourth tree 
down, and, attacking them, killed them and ate them up. 
The women retraced their steps, and, coming to the proper trail, followed 
  
xa means also a person possessing mysterious or magical power. past, or port, bair of the private parts, sometimes applied to that of males alone. 3 This tree dogs not grow in the Utmat country, but is one of the most common trees in the Upper Thompson, southern Shuswap, snd Okanagon countries.      

----

254 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
it, while the four dogs went home to their masters. Reaching their grand- 
mother, who lived near a rocky mountain to the west, they found her sitting 
outside with young fir-trees growing up all around her. She was old and 
frail, and not able to move, her knees being bent up to her cars as she sat. 
They showed her grandchild to her, and asked her where they should bury 
her. She said, “Do not bury me, but drown me in a pool of some stream 
near a gravelly or sandy beach; so that young men, when they come to 
wash themselves, may gain knowledge through me. Those who bathe often 
at such places will become great and wise, for 1 will put something into them 
when they are bathing; and those who bathe early and often with me (or at 
such places) shall live to be of great age like myself, and shall not die until 
their knees are bent up to their ears like mine.” 
30. Nicimiken* 
(Upper and Lower Uta'mgt.) 
There was a man called Ntcimiken® or Ntctmka, who lived on the Thompson River near Lytton. His wife was stolen by a Cannibal who made 
his home on the west side of Fraser River, opposite or above its junction 
with the Thompson. Nitcimrken was anxious to recover his wife, but knew 
it was useless to attempt it without help, as the Cannibal was very blood- 
thirsty, and, moreover, was endowed with great magical powers. Therefore 
he left the Thompson, and made a journey through the countries of the neigh- 
boring tribes to the east. There he stole a boy, whom he took home with 
him. Together they went back into the neighboring mountains to train them- 
selves and to obtain mysterious knowledge (medicine). They staid in the 
most remote and “mysterious” parts of the mountains, where they prayed, 
fasted, and purified themselves. 
One day when travelling, they came upon a lake which was full of 
beavers. They were hungry, and desired to get some of these animals to 
eat, therefore they proposed to drink the lake dry, so as to be able to catch 
them. Ntcimi'ken drank first; but before very long his belly became distended, 
and he had to stop drinking before he had been able to decrease the size 
of the lake. Then the boy began to drink, and did not stop until he had 
drunk the lake dry. 
Now Nicimi'ken knew that the boy had grown proficient in magic. They “killed the beavers, and Nicimi'ken ate all their bodies excepting the tails,   
+ Some say “place me.” # Compaze this story with Tale No. 30, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. $0. 3 This name may mean “bunt back” (fom ims, “burned or singed to a black color” and Then, the compound form of the word for “back”). 4 Some say two boys, only one of whom developed magical powers. 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 255 
which he threw away. He only gave a little of the meat to the lad, there- 
fore the latter was still hungry. After having glutted himself, Ntctmrken fell 
asleep. When he awoke, he found the boy eating the tails which he had 
thrown away. He said to him, “Why do you cat that trash? Don't you 
know that it is Beaver's excrement?” But the boy, kept on roasting the tails 
and eating them, and only laughed at what Ntcimrken said. At last the 
latter tried one, and, finding it to be delicious eating, he reserved the remaining tails for himself. 
Now they journeyed to the mouth of the Thompson River, and Ntcimi'ken 
sent the lad across the Fraser to attack the Cannibal. Seeing the latter near his house, he called names at him, such as “carings,” “broken leg,’ etc. 
The Cannibal rushed at the boy with a very long spear, but the lad jumped 
on the top of a mountain-peak, and escaped his thrust. Thus the Cannibal 
followed him from peak to peak; but the boy, by jumping, always managed to evade the thrusts from his long spear. At last, however, the boy got 
tired, and called on Nitcimi'ken for help, saying, “Uncle, our enemy presses 
me hard. Blow the smoke from your pipe this way." Ntcimiken, who was 
sitting on the ground smoking and sharpening his knife, jumped up and attacked the Cannibal. They fought for the mastery, but at last the latter 
wrestled with Ntcimrken, who fell undermost in the struggle. He called on 
the boy for help, saying, “Take my knife and cut off our enemy's right arm, 
for he kills me with it.” The boy cut off the Cannibal's right arm. Then 
Ntcimiken said, *Cut off his left arm, for he masters me with it.” The boy 
did as directed. Then he said, *Cut off his penis, for he wrestles with it,” 
“and the bdy did so. Thus the boy did as directed until he had cut up all 
parts of the Cannibal's body. Then Ntcimiken arose and threw the several 
parts of the Cannibals body to the tribes of the four quarters. He threw 
the head to the Coast Indians (S'a'tcinko and Yi'kelta),! therefore these people 
have large heads! He threw the heart and privates to the Okanagon tribes, 
therefore they are brave, and the men have large sexual organs. The arms 
were thrown to the Nkamtcinemux and Shuswap, therefore they became 
expert warriors. After he had thus thrown parts of the body to each of the 
tribes, the boy said, “You have forgotten the Niakya’pamux'o’e and the 
Ut&'mqt. Then he took the knife and threw it to the, former, and, wiping his bloody hands with a bunch of cedar-bark, he threw it to the Utamqt. 
Therefore the latter are inferior people;® and the Thompson became a fierce people, and were noted for stabbing one another with knives. 
Now the boy went across the river to fetch Ntcimr'ken's wife. He crossed in a canoe of horse-tails (1#/xzn). He entered the Cannibals house,   
? Ykelta; the Le'kwitdati?, the most southern Kwvakiutl tribe. 2 Some say high heads; others, broad heads. 3 Some say unwarlike people; others say poor people.

----

256 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
and saw human heads hanging all around in a circle. The woman had ear- rings and necklaces of fingernails. She was engaged in breaking human 
bones to extract the marrow, for that was the Cannibal's favorite food. When 
she saw the boy, she said, “Did you not meet the Cannibal? He answered, “Yes, I met him and slew him. I have now come to fetch you back to your 
husband Ntcimi'ken.” She was overjoyed at this news, and at once began 
to divest herself of her fingernail ornaments. The lad said, “There is no 
hurry. I wish you to let me take a sweat-bath before we depart.” Then he 
took four stones and entered the woman's privates, where he sweat-bathed. 
When he came out to wash himself his hair had grown down to his shoulders. 
He reentered, and, on coming forth the second time, his hair had grown 
halfway down his back. On issuing the third time, it had reached the small 
of his back, and the fourth time it had grown to his heels. The woman 
said, “Your hair is now too long,” therefore she cut it off even with his 
buttocks. 
Now they returned to Ntcimi’ken, whom they found in his house on the 
Thompson. He was glad to get his wife back. The lad staid with them a 
long time, but left them for brief intervals, going back to the mountains where 
he trained himself and hunted. 
Now the time came for him to return to his own country, and Ntcimiken told him to sweatbathe. When he was ready to start, Ntcimiken and his 
wife gave him directions how to go, where to camp, and how to manage when danger threatened him. The woman gave him a present of four goat- 
hair blankets? when he was leaving, and Ntcimrken gave him a pair of snowshoes and two deer’s tries? He turned these into dogs, which followed * 
him. The first night he camped on a high mountain® near the edge of a 
precipice. He lighted a fire and sat down near it, with the dogs on each 
side. Presently four * mysterious persons (xazxa) * approached the camp. He said to them, “Sit down on the opposite side of the fire,” (which was near the 
edge of the cliff) “for my dogs may bite you if you come too close.” They 
sat down as directed. Then he gradually pushed the fire nearer to them, 
and the dogs also moved towards them from each side. They gradually 
backed away from the firc and the dogs, and eventually fell over the cliff® 
The lad thought he had killed them, but the following night they appeared 
at his camp again. He repeated his tactics, with the same result. He did 
this four nights. Then the xaza' attacked him. He left his dogs behind,   
1 Some Upper Uti'mat say the present was four necklaces, — one of rattlesaske.tais, one of Golden eagle (Aald'u) tail-feathers, one of chicken-hawk tailfeathers, and one of fer tect hawk tail-feathers. The Upper Uii'mat say that these were blown up by the wind. # Some say near Spences Bridge. + Some say there were only three. 5 Men endowed with great “mystery,” medicine or magic, supernatural beings. ® The Upper Uta'mqt say that the lad put one of the. tripes under cach arm, aod pressed them, the wind * blowing out made a growling noise, snd the raza’ thought they were dogs.   
   
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 257 
and jumped from one mountain-peak to another; but the zaxa’ followed him, 
and gradually gained on him. He threw away one blanket after another to make himself lighter,! but still they were gaining on him. 
Now, there were two women engaged in making blankets in a house 
near by, and, through their magic, they knew of his distress. They said, 
“He will soon be overtaken. Let us help him” So they took a hammer 
and chisel and ran to meet him. He saw them, and said, Aunts, help me!” 
They answered, “We have no nephew.” He said “Elder sisters, help me!” 
but they answered, We have no younger brother.” Then he said, “Wives, 
help me!” and they answered, “Why did you not say that before?” They 
split the trunk of a tree and hid him inside, the crack in the tree closing 
again. Now, the axa’ arrived and asked the women if they had seen a man 
pass by that way. They said, “No. But the raza’ were not satisfied with 
their answer, for they could not find the fugitives tracks farther on. They 
commenced to search around the place where the women were. Then the 
latter attacked them with their hammer and chisel and killed. them. They 
threw their bodies into the woods, saying, “Henceforth you shall simply be 
spirits of the forest, and shall not be able to chase people.” The lad went home with the women to their house. Upon entering, he 
saw some water in a very small basket. He said, “I will drink it all, be- cause 1 am thirsty.” They answered, *Do so if you like: it does not matter.” 
He drank his fill, but the water remained undiminished. Then the women 
took one drink cach and finished it. On looking around the inside of the 
lodge, the lad saw a gun near each of the women's beds. He said to him- 
self, “These must be their husbands,” consequently he was afraid. But the 
women knew his thoughts, and said, “These are not men. We have no 
husbands” Now the younger sister washed the lad and gave him new clothes 
to put on, and he became their husband. Each sister had only one ball for her gun. They showed him how to use the guns. They said, “When you 
go hunting, always stalk the deer from behind. Wait until you get them in 
line, one in front of the other, then shoot at the backside of the last one, 
and the ball will kill them all. But you must pull the trigger very gently, 
then you will be sure to find the ball in the breast of the foremost one, 
where it will remain. If you pull the trigger strongly, the ball will pass 
through them all, and will go very far, so you will not be able to find it." 
The lad went hunting, and, seeing a band of deer going one in front of the 
other up a mountain-slope, he fired at them. from behind. He pulled the 
trigger with great force, and when he had cut up the deer, he could not find 
the ball. He was very sorry because of losing the ball, and would not speak when he came home. The woman said, “I told you what would happen if 
    
+ Some say to retard the progress of bis pursuers.

----

258 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
you pulled the trigger with force” Then she held out her hand and showed 
him the ball, saying, “It came back to me when it left the deer.” 
Before long his wives each gave birth to a child; and the children, when 
they were able to walk, cried to sce their grandparents. He asked his wives 
if they had parents alive, and they answered, *Yes.” Then he said, ‘We 
will take our children to sce them.” They went to where the old people 
lived, and showed themselves first to a pubescent girl who was washing herself, 
and told her to tell the people to clean their house for their reception. When 
this had been done, they all went in and lived there. 
31a. The Goat people.’ 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
All the goats were once people who lived in a high rock somewhere at 
the back of Spuzzum, on the northwest side of Fraser River. Below and 
near to the rock was a lake of yellow color, in which they used to bathe. They had an old grandmother who said to the young goats one day, “I am 
going to fetch firewood. Play until I come back!” Then the young goats took off their goat-skins and ran up and down on the rocks, amusing them- 
seles. The Indians learned that the goats were people by watching them 
playing and bathing when their goat-skins were off. This is the reason that, 
when a goat is killed, the hunter always sings a song to please the Goat 
people. Grisly Bear and Black Bear were also at one time people, and for 
a like reason a hunter who kills one of them sings a song to please the 
Bear people, stating that he regrets the death of their friend, and hopes they 
will not be sorry or angry. 
A man who had two wives — one with an infant in her arms, and the 
other one pregnant — went hunting goats. He saw two of these animals, 
and followed them up with the intention, if possible, of getting within arrow- 
shot of them. The goats disappeared over the top of a cliff, but the hunter 
still followed them. When he reached the top of the cliff, he expected to 
find them within range, and was surprised to see no trace of them. As he 
was looking around, he noticed a small lake, and two young women sitting 
near the edge of it. He was astonished to see strange women in such a 
place, so he approached them and asked them if they had seen any goats. 
He did not know that they were the goats he had seen. They laughed at his question, and answered, “No.” They said, “Come with us, and you will 
see many goats.” 
They led him to a house in the rocks where there were many pesple 
of all ages. It was situated in a steep cliff: so they spat on the soles of 
See Shuswap, pr 748. -  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 259 
his feet, that he might be enabled to walk up with them. The women be- 
came his wives, and he wished to have sexual intercourse with them the first 
night; but they said, *No, you cannot have your desire: we only have sexual 
intercourse for a short time at a certain season of each year.” 
His parentsdndaw asked him to go out hunting, as they were desirous 
of eating some meat. His wives told him to shoot one goat only, so he 
shot one and brought it home. They cooked the meat, and all ate of it. 
Thus he staid with the Goat people several months, and killed a goat almost 
every day, and they all ate the flesh at evening. 
He noticed that his brothers-in-law — a one-year-old and a two-year-old 
boy respectively, — went out to bathe in a pool every evening, and returned 
just in time to eat the meat with the rest. He watched them, and found 
that they changed into goats as soon as they left the house. He also noticed 
that the human part of the goats he shot was unharmed and returned home, 
and only the goat part was killed. He wanted to prove these things: so 
one evening he shot one of the young goats who was bathing in the pool, 
and, after cutting off his nose, put it in his quiver. Then, going home, he lay 
down and pretended to sleep. Shortly afterwards one of his brothers-in-law 
came running into the house with his nose bleeding. The people sent him 
back to the water, saying, “If you bathe, it will soon stop bleeding;” but it 
did not stop: so the hunter went there, and, throwing his nose at him, it 
immediately went back to its place, and the wound stopped bleeding. When 
he returned home, he said to the people, “Why did you not tell me that 
these goats who bathe at the pool every evening were my brothers-in-aw? 
Now, it was nearing the rutting-season of the goats, and they put a 
watchman on a cliff within sight of the river, that he might see when the 
dog-salmon should begin to ascend the river. As soon as he was aware that 
the dog-salmon were running, he informed the people, and they all went and 
washed themselves. Then the females all ran to the top of a ridge, and the 
males after them. The hunter had on a heavy goatskin, and was thus 
unable to keep up with the other males, who outstripped him in the race: so 
he had the chagrin of seeing them all rutting and finished before he was 
halfway up the ridge: therefore he turned back and went home. Next day 
his wives put a very light skin on him, so that, when they raced to the ridge 
after washing themselves, he easily outstripped all the other males, and, 
reaching the top of the ridge, had sexual connection with all the females 
before any of the males could arrive. 
He staid many more months with the Goat people, and one of his 
wives bore him a child. While the child was yet an infant, it wished to 
see its grandparents, the hunter's parents, so the hunter told the people that 
he was going to take his child home. Accordingly he went to visit the 
people, taking his Goat wife and child and his two-year-old brother-in-law 
'33—JESUP NORTH PACIHIC EXPED., VOL. VILL

----

260 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
(Komu's?) along with him. Before he started he had hunted and killed many 
goats: s0 he took two gloves full of fat, and two full of goat's meat, along 
with him. 
He had been away for over a year and a half; his wives and relatives 
had mourned him as dead, and had cut their hair. He repaired to his parents’ 
house first, and saw his younger sister outside gathering firboughs. As she 
was breaking one off the tree, he seized her hand. As she did not see any 
one, she thought it might be Raven: so she said, “Raven, don't fool me!” 
Then her brother said, “Don't you see me? Iam your brother come back 
again” But she could not see him, because he was invisible; but when he 
made himself visible, she recognized him. Then he appeared to his wives and 
his mother in the same manner, and, eventually, afier he had made himself 
visible, they recognized him. He told them all to clean the house and spread 
fresh branches on the floor. When the house was ready, the party entered 
and took their seats. Now they feasted for several days, and the hunter distributed the contents 
of the four gloves among the people. Each day they made a large basketful 
of soup of black and white moss. This was a special delicacy for the guests, 
as it was goat's food. 
One day Komu's had his ‘belly swelled to a large size after gorging himself with moss soup. Then the young men asked him to come and play 
ball. They were all active and light, and played almost naked; while Komu's 
had a large belly, and was heavy after his big dinner: so when he attempted 
to catch the ball, they would jump on him, knock him over, and break wind 
in his face. After a time, however, Komu's's stomach became smaller, and 
he began to feel lighter: so he seized the ball and ran with it to the Goats’ 
house in the cliff, where he hid it. All the young men gave chase, and might have overtaken Komu's before 
he reached the cliff; but he caused a cold wind to blow on them, and they, 
being naked, were all frozen to death. The Goat people were angry at 
Komu's and told him to go back. He returned, jumped over each of the 
young men’s bodies, and they all came to life again; and, as each one 
revived, he broke wind in his face, thus revenging himself for a similar insult 
inflicted on himself. 
Some time afterwards Komu's went home with his sister; but the hunter 
staid among his people, and his child also.   
* Kom's is the ordinary name for a two-year-old mountain-gost, It is sometimes called hoiat instead of Roms.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 261 
316. The Hunter and the Goats! 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A party were hunting goats in the mountains of the Utamqt country. 
They consisted of a father and several sons. The former was noted for his 
wisdom. They hunted many days, but could not find any game. The father 
knew what was going to happen. 
One night when they were all in camp, a goat came within sight. Now, 
the youngest son had been training himself, and practising running and shooting. 
He was very swift of foot: therefore his father told him to run out and shoot 
the goat. He did as directed, and was successful in killing it. While he 
skinned and cut up the meat, he prayed and treated the remains very respect- 
fully. He spread fir-boughs on the ground, and laid the pieces of meat very 
carefully on them. Then he tied the meat together with his packing-line and 
wrapped fir-twigs around the whole. 
He had finished, and was just preparing to start for the camp with his 
burden, when he saw a woman approaching. She was good-looking and of 
a white complexion. He wondered who she could be. He did not know 
that she was the goat he had killed. She came up to him and asked him 
to accompany her home. He said, “No, I cannot go with any woman. I 
am training, and it would ruin me for hunting. I must keep myself pure.” 
She praised him for his prowess in hunting, for being so careful with the 
meat, and for showing so much respect to the goats. Then she told him if 
he would go home with her, he would gain great knowledge and become a 
much better hunter. He consented, and, leaving his pack of goat-meat 
where it was, he went along with her. She took his bow and arrows and 
carried them. 
At last they came to a high cliff, and entered it through a large crack, 
which immediately closed behind them. Everything was strange inside, and, 
feeling faint, he fell asleep. When he awoke, he perceived that he was in 
a large cavern, and there were many people of both sexes and all ages sitting 
around talking to one another. They all welcomed him heartily. Then the 
woman approached him and said, “I am your wife for the mean time. This 
is the dwelling of the goats. When they enter this their abode, you hunters 
cannot find them. This is the rutting-season of goats. I will make you 
a goat.” 
het the people had by this time departed. Now the woman took a very 
large skin belonging to an old male goat, and put it around him. Then she 
said, “Let us go and join our friends.” She opened the cliff, which shut 
again when they had passed through. Repairing to some grassy slopes sur-   
+ Compare, No. 3ta.

----

262 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
rounded by cliffs, she said to him, “Jump on the rocks!” He did as directed. 
Then she said, “Are you now a goat?” and he answered, “I am.” — “Then 
0 to the female goats and rut with them,” she said. The other goats were 
all on the grassy slopes above, and he went to them; but the younger he- 
goats attacked him and gored him badly. He went back to the Goat's house and told the woman how he had fared. He said, “I am too heavy.” Feeling 
sick, he lay down. She changed his skin for that of a large but younger 
goat, and sent him to rut again with the goats; but the male goats ripped 
him badly and drove him away. Returning, the woman changed his skin for 
that of a middle-aged goat and sent him back; but he was driven away from 
the band, as before. 
Thus the woman had sent him to rut three times since evening. Now 
it was nearly morning, so she changed his skin for that of a young strong 
goat in its prime; then she went to the band of goats herself and mingled 
with them. The hunter felt much lighter now, and, reaching the band of 
goats, he drove all the males away. Then he rutted with all the female 
goats, both old and young, including his wife and mother-in-law. He finished 
just at daylight. Then he and all the goats went home and slept. When 
he awoke, he found the woman sleeping with him, and he desired to have 
sexual intercourse with her. She refused, saying, “Our customs are not the 
same as with your people. 1 cannot let you indulge at present. You must 
wait until night, and take me among the others” Thus he rutted with the 
goats four successive nights, and visited the band four times each night. 
Three times each night the male goats drove him off; but on the fourth time 
each night he succeeded, and had all the females to himself. During the 
daytime he always slept. 
At the end of the four days and nights the woman took out his bow 
and arrows from where she had hidden them, and told him to follow her. He went with her, and all the other goats followed them. They came to a 
very high precipice of slanting rock. She said, “You must slide down with 
us to the bottom.” She slid first, and he followed her. The other goats all 
came behind. Reaching the bottom in safety, the goats all bade him good-by 
excepting the woman who conducted him back to where he had left his pack 
of goatmeat. Here she handed him back his weapons, saying, “You will 
now be a great hunter, and will be able to follow the goats on the precipices 
where they walk. When you kill goats, treat their bodies respectfully, for they are people. Do not shoot female goats, for they were your wives, and 
will bear you children. Do not kill kids, for they may be your offspring. 
Only shoot your brothers-inaw, the male goats. Do not be sorry when you 
kill ‘them, for they do not die, but return home. The flesh and skin (the 
goat part) remain in your possessions but their real selves (the human part) 
lives just as before, when it was covered with goat's flesh and skin” Then

----

‘TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 263 
she lifted his burden of goat-meat on his back, at the same time saying, “If 
you keep my counsel, even if you carry the meat of an entire goat on your 
back, it will seem so light to you that you will not know you are carrying 
anything.” 
Now they parted, she going home, and he to his father's camp. When 
he arrived; he roasted the meat for his father, who ate of it. After they 
had eaten all the meat, the lad gathered all the bones together and wrapped 
them up carefully. Then he deposited them in a pool of water in which he 
bathed. Next morning when he washed himself, he missed the nose-bone of 
the goat. Returning home, he would not eat or talk, because he knew his 
father had taken it. At night the father put the nose-bone in his son's head- 
band; and when the lad awoke in the morning, he found it there. He was 
angry at his father, and said, “Why do you thus insult the goats? His 
father answered, “I only wished to find out if you had learned anything during 
your sojourn with the goats. I did it to try you” The lad then took the 
bone to the pool and threw it in beside the others. 
Now, his brothers had left their father before the lad’s return, and had 
gone to another part of the mountains to try and find game, so he went in 
search of them. He found them in their camp, reduced so much by star- 
vation that they were unable to walk. They had found no game, and had 
become so weak that they could neither hunt nor return home. The lad 
hunted, and, being successful, fed his brothers on goat-flesh until they had 
gained strength enough to walk. 
Then they all started for their father's camp. On the way they saw a 
she-goat and kid on a hillside. The lad said he would go to shoot the goat, 
and told his brothers to travel on towards the camp. He came close to the 
goats, and was going to shoot them; but the she-goat cried out, “I am your 
wife. Beware of shooting your wife and child!” He was sorry now for 
intending to shoot them, and said, “I was too hasty, and forgot your advice.” 
The she.goat went up and embraced him, saying, Be sure to follow my 
advice. If you do not do so, it will be worse for you. You nearly shot 
your child just now. Never think again of shooting a kid. Don't you know 
they are all your children? Neither attempt to shoot a she-goat. Don't you 
remember? They are all your wives.” 
Now the goat and kid went away; and as soon as they were out of 
sight, a he-goat appeared in sight within easy range. It came near him and 
stood still. He shot it, and carried the meat to his brothers, whom he soon 
overtook. His brothers said, “That is not the flesh of the she-goat you went 
to shoot.” He answered, “No, she ran away so fast, I was unable to shoot 
her.” Then his brothers said, “You need not lie to us. We already know 
about your living with the goats, and that the she-goats are your wives, and 
the kids your children.”

----

264 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
Soon they arrived at their father's camp, and on the following four days 
the lad hunted and killed many male goats. They then had all the meat 
they could carry: therefore they went home to their house on the river, all 
of them carrying heavy loads of meat. 
32. The old Woman and the Boy. 
(Upper Uta'mqt) 
Once there was a great plague in the country, and every person died 
excepting an old woman and a small boy. The old woman took the boy 
and cared for him. 
One day he saw a flock of birds flying by, and he said to his grand- 
mother, “I will go and get them.” The old woman answered, “How can 
you get them? Your father, who used bow and arrows, could only get one 
once in a while by shooting it, so how can you expect to get any?” But 
the boy left his grandmother, and, running, caught them with his hands. 
‘When he brought the birds home, the old woman was surprised, and won- 
dered how he had caught them. 
Again a flock of ducks flew by, and he told the old woman he would 
go and get them, but she laughed at him as before; so he ran and caught 
them with his hands. When he brought home the ducks, she showed him 
how they were cut up and cleaned, and what uses were made of the feathers, 
skins, etc. 
One day he saw a deer, and told his grandmother he would go and get 
it; but she said, “Deer run fast. How can you get it? Your fathers shot 
them with arrows, and yet they could not get very many.” But he ran and 
caught the deer and killed it. He did not know how to cut it up, so he 
put the carcass inside of a hollow log and hauled it home to the old woman. 
She showed him how the people used to skin the deer, and how they cut 
it up. She also told him what uses the different parts of the deer were put 
to. After this he caught many deer, and they always shifted camp to the 
spot where the carcass was. One day he saw a black bear, and said he would get it. The old 
woman said, “Be careful! Black bears are sometimes bad;” but he ran and 
caught it and killed it. Then they shifted camp to where the carcass was, 
and the old woman showed him how to skin and cut up the bear, and told 
him what the people used to do with the skin, bones, flesh, and fat. 
One day he saw a grisly bear, and told his grandmother that he would 
get it; but she said to him, “Do not go, it may kill you! It is very strong 
and fierce, and sometimes killed your fathers, who were better equipped than 
you, for they had weapons. Only men with strong hearts kill the grisly bear.”

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 265 
He answered, “You need not be afraid. Iam strong in magic. Watch me!” 
Then he transformed himself into a wolf, and then again into bird's down: 
so the old woman let him go, and he killed the grisly bear. 
Thus he caught and killed goats and all the other animals and birds; 
and the old woman told him their names, and what they were formerly used 
for by the people. 
One day he said to his grandmother, “I have seen all the birds and 
animals, but I am lonely, and should like to see people. Where do they 
live?” She said, “There are no people in the country except you and me; 
but in another country! a long distance away there are people.” He said, 
“We will go and find them.” So he put his grandmother in a hollow log, 
and dragged her behind him? She knew the way; and as they went along 
she told him the names of all the plants and trees, and what uses the people 
made of them. After travelling many days, they came to an impenetrable 
barrier of forest and fallen timber. He told his grandmother what was ahead 
of them, and that it was impassable: so she came out of the log and looked 
at it. As soon as she did this, the forest and fallen timber turned into an 
open, sandy plain. At last they came within sight of the people's houses: 
so the boy left his grandmother, and, changing himself into a wolf, ap- 
proached the houses. The people fired arrows at him, but could not hit him. 
Then he changed himself into a deer; but when they saw him, they shot at 
him as before. Again he changed himself into bird's down, and fluttered on 
the breeze towards the houses. The people said there must be some magic 
about this. Then he appeared as a good-looking young man, and the people 
welcomed him. 
He staid with the people, and married two of their daughters. He had 
a son by one wife, and a daughter by the other; then he took his wives, 
and children, and grandmother, and returned to his own country. 
33. Owl and Tsa'au’z® 
(Lower Utamat) 
Some people had a boy who was of an cvil temper and very pecvish. 
He was constantly crying, and annoyed them very much. One night he was 
very cross, and crying as usual: so they put him outside, and asked Owl*   
+ Some say this country was to the south or southeast. + Some say he also dragged 4 hollow log ful of dried meat, which they lived oa as they traveled soog. 5 Most of the people call this the story of Tswau's, but some call it the story of Owl, Teaau'e is a personal name among the Lytton band at the present day, and a couple or more noted medicioe-men sad war iors have borne the name among them, 4 Toth Upper and Lower Thompson Indians frighten their children by calling on the owl to come and, take them if they cry. Consequently young o are much afraid of owls. Some people also frighten crying. children by saying the panther will come for them.   
  
 

----

266 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
to come and take him. They said this in joke, thinking to frighten him into 
quietness. Some time after dark, Owl came, carrying a basket full of insects, and, putting the boy in the basket, went away with him. Next morning the 
people searched for the boy in vain, and bewailed him as dead. Owl reared 
him as his own son; and when he became big, he took him hunting, so that 
after a time he became a famous hunter. 
One day he said to Crow, “Can you procure me some different kind of 
food? I am tired of living on meat and insects.” Crow said he would, and 
determined to try and get some roots from the people. He went to the 
houses of the people, and there met the boy's mother and sister going to their cellar for roots. They were weeping as they went along. He asked 
them for some roots, which he said he wished to give to the person they 
were weeping for. They asked him where the boy was, and he told them 
he was living with Owl. After Crow had received the roots, he flew away. 
They called out all the people to watch in which direction Crow had dis- 
appeared; but none of them were able to see so far, except the small owl? 
whose eyes did not water. The following day the people journeyed towards 
where the small owl had seen Crow disappear, and finally found the house 
in which Owl lived. They took the lad out, and burned the house; while 
the lad cursed Owl, saying, “Henceforth you shall be an ordinary owl, and 
shall never again be able to steal children.” 
On the way back they came to a lake; and, as it was very hot weather, 
the lad told the people he intended to bathe in it. They advised him to 
desist; but he persisted, and, as soon as he entered the water, he was changed 
into a loon. The people went home sorrowing; but a young woman said, 
“I can get him back, you need not sorrow.” On the following day she repaired 
to the lake, after telling the lads sisters to follow her. She hid herself near 
the lake's edge, and called on Loon, who came ashore. He left his loon 
covering at the edge of the water, went to the woman, and lay down beside 
her. She gave a signal; and the sisters, running up, threw medicine of herbs * over their brother, who thus became his natural self again. On their way home they had to pass a house where a man called Tsa'au'z lived, He was spotted, and covered with sores, and was also a cripple. The lad said he must go into the house and see him. Although they advised him not to enter, yet he went in, and, taking Tsa'au’z by the nose, shook him, so that all his bones fell out. Then, he crawled inside and became Tsa'au’z himself. As soon as he had done this, he was sorry, because he felt the pain from the sores much. The women went home, leaving him 
moaning. 
Now, the young woman who had recovered the lad from being a loon   
+ Some say fosects and snakes. 2 A small variety of owl (sha'pug or sga'gik). 3 A decoction of medicinal herbs.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 267 
was much sought after by all the young men of the tribe, but she would 
not marry any of them. She steadily refused every suitor, until the people, 
at last became angry with her and said, “You better go and get Tsa'auz, the 
man of sores, for your husband.” Feeling piqued at this taunt, she answered, 
“Yes, I will do so; for I consider that even he is better than any of my suitors.” Then she took a bundle of mats with her, went to Tsa'au’z's house, 
and told him that she had come to marry him. He said to her, “I cannot 
believe you intend to marry me. You will find the smell of my sores too 
obnoxious.” She told him she meant what she said: rolled him up in the 
mats, and carried him to her parents’ house. The latter did not refuse to 
receive him, but held their noses as he was carried inside. After dark, when 
they had "all retired to bed, Tsa'au’z took off his sores or spotted covering, and became clothed in dentalia instead. On the following morning the dentalia 
fell off, and, by the time the people awoke he was clothéd in sores again. 
This happened four nights, so Tsa'au’z’s parents-inaw became rich in dentalia. 
The woman would not let any of her sister's children get any of the 
shells, because they had laughed at her husband. All the people made fun 
of the woman and her husband. Raven especially made fun, and said, “Let 
our new son-inlaw gather wood for us!” He said this because he thought Tsa'au’z was helpless and a cripple. The woman carried him to where some 
trees were standing. Tsa'auz kicked the butts of four of them with his foot, 
-and thus threw them down. Then at his command, they became four pieces 
of split wood, — one piece for each underground house. His wife carried the 
pieces to the houses, and lowered them down with a line; but in lowering a 
piece down in one of the houses, it turned over, and, sliding quickly, it ran 
a splinter through the testicles of the Moon, who was sitting underneath. 
When the pieces touched the floor of the underground houses, they 
increased in size und number, until each house was so full of split wood that 
there was no room left for the people. Then the people said, “Let Tsa'auz 
hunt with us” Wolf, Lynx, Hawk, and others got ready to hunt on the 
morrow. Tsa'au'z's father-in-law made a pair of snow-shoes for him, and tied 
animal's tails? to the ends. Tsa'auz tricd them on after dark, and, going 
outside, ran around the houses, making great strides. Next morning the 
people observed the snow-shoe tracks, and asked one another who had made 
them, for they were surprised at the distance between the steps. Raven 
answered, “These are my tracks. I only, of all the people, could stride so far.”    
  
* Some say eaglefeathers. It seems there was a custom at one time, among some of the Upper and Lower ‘Thompsons, of omamenting the heels or the tails of snow-shocs with animal's tails and eagle's feathers as trailers. So far 1 have been unable 10 get any authentic jnformation regarding the custom, and. it is hard to say whether it was done with the object of giving additional swiftness to the feet, or because the animals or birds were the protectors (s62'm) of the wearer, of as a mark of distinction, or simply as omament. Nearly all of the moc- casing made by the Upper Thompsons had trailers of buckskin, which it is ssid were used to pull on 10d off the moccasins casly, and to save the heel to some extent in going down steep hills, 
     
      34--JESUP NORTH FACINIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

268 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
When every one was ready, they all departed to hunt, Tsa'au’z being 
carried by. his wife behind the other hunters who joked and made fun of him, 
saying, “It is a poor kind of hunter that has to be carried by his wife!” 
As the other hunters were walking fast, they left Tsa'au’z and his wife far 
behind. When they were out of sight, the woman deposited Tsa'au’z in the 
snow, saying she could not carry him farther, and would return for him in 
the evening. Naw, he took off his garment of sores and hung it up on the 
branch of a tree. Then, putting on his snow-shoes, he ran, and, making a 
circuit, soon got ahead of the other hunters. He gathered all the deer 
together in a gulch, where he ran them down on his snow-shoes and killed 
them. Then, taking his two pairs of gloves, he filled one pair with the flesh 
of the deer, and the other pair with their fat, returned to where he had hung 
up his skin, put it on and sat down in the snow. Now Tsa’au’z’s brothersn-law, who had been unable to find any game, 
had returned ahead of the other hunters, and, coming to the tree where Tsa'au’z 
had hung up his skin, recognized it as being the outer covering of their 
brotherindaw. They hid themselves close by (until he should arrive), and 
watched him don his sores. His wife arrived shortly afterwards, took him 
on her back and carried him and his gloves home. Here his father-in-law 
took the gloves, and, lo and behold! when he emptied them out, the house 
became full of deer meat and fat. He sent a lot to each house for the 
people to eat, because the hunters had all returned empty-handed and the 
people were hungry. Again they all went out hunting, but with the same result, for Tsa'au'z 
did the same as on the previous occasion. The brothersindaw pretended to 
go hunting with the others, but soon turned back, and, reaching the tree 
where Tsa'au'Z’s skin was hanging, they took it down, burned it, and then 
hid themselves near by. Tsa'auz returned with his gloves full of meat and 
fat. He missed his skin, and, learning that it had been burned, he searched 
in the ashes, where he found some small pieces which still remained. These 
he put on; and he became a man of sores, as before. 
Again the people all went hunting, but with like result. This time the 
brothers-inaw took Tsa'au’z's skin, blew on it, and made it into fog; that is 
the reason why fog can be smelled at the present day: it is the smell of the 
sores and of the burnt skin. When Tsa’au’z returned to get his skin, he 
found that it had been turned into fog. He tried in vain to collect it, for 
the fog moved up and down on the distant mountains, therefore he had to 
remain as he was; in his natural shape, — that of a handsome young man. 
The people were surprised when they beheld Tsa'au’z walking home 
alongside of his wife, and when they saw the form he had taken. They all 
became jealous of the good-looking hunter who could kill so many deer, and 
Raven wished that he had married his daughter to him.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 269 
34. Stabbed-with-his-Leg.! 
(Lower Uta'mqt) 
A man cut off his foot, and filed the end of his leg-bone to a point. When his friends wished to sce what he was doing, he said, “No, I cannot let you see: you will shoot my foot.” Afterwards he stabbed his friends with his leg when they were asleep, and killed them all. 
35. The Lad who shot the Snake. 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
A boy who had reached the age of puberty went into the mountains to 
train himself and to gain knowledge. He continucd his training for a long 
time, and repaired to the mountains frequently. He did not wish to become 
a medicine man, but desired to be a chief and a great hunter. His “spirit” 
told him in his dreams to wear fir-branches on his breast. 
After he had worn them for several years, and had attained the age of 
about twenty-five years, his “spirit” told him to go to Spuzzum Creek early each morning, and fire arrows across the stream. He did as directed, and, 
going to that part of the creek near where the bridge is at the present day, 
he fired his arrows across the creek from the north side, so that each arrow 
alighted ahead of the last one he had shot, thus forming a line. He did this 
several mornings, and eventually, one morning when going to pick up the 
arrows he had fired, found that one of them had killed a huge snake by 
striking it between the eyes. The snake was about three fect in diameter. Before this happened he had always been a poor marksman; but now he 
always hit game in vital parts, and never again missed goats when shooting 
at them. He thus became a noted hunter, and eventually a chief. 
36. Close-cut-Hair. 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
A man called Close<cut-Hair (A&llkin?) lived with his two sisters in a 
house near the river! He was noted because he wore his hair cut very short. The nearest people lived in four underground houses a considerable distance 
  
+ This story is said to be only a fragment. 2 Or AW¥IMo, “close cat hair” similar to that of the whites and Indians at the present day (from the word Sal). 3 Said to be the Fraser River, probaly in the upper pact of the Ut¥mqt country.

----

270 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
up the river, and in each house there was a young maiden just become of 
marriageable age. The two sisters knew everything that their brother did, 
although he was not aware of it. 
One night he left home, went into his canoe, and paddled up the river 
to one of the underground houses. Here he asked the people to give him their marriageable daughter for a wife, and gave them his copper club! as 
a marriage-present (tcf zamin). They consented, for a copper club was con- 
sidered a valuable article, and he took the girl away with him. After paddling 
downstream some distance, they came to an island. Here he made his bride 
divest herself of all her clothes, and cut her hair short. After making her go 
ashore, he pushed off into the stream and began to whistle. As soon as he 
did this, a cold wind started to blow. Leaving the girl thus, he went home 
and slept. His sisters noticed that he would not eat any food. On the 
following morning early he repaired to the island, found the body of the 
girl, that had been frozen to death, ate it up, and left nothing but the 
bones. 
One night, some time after this happened, he took his canoe and paddled up the river again to another undergroud house, where he gave a similar 
present, and obtained the marriageable girl of the house for his wife. He 
took her away, and, landing her on the same island, made her strip naked, 
and cut off her hair. Then, taking her clothes away, he pushed off into the 
stream and whistled, thus causing a cold wind to blow. She was frozen to 
death, and next morning he went there and ate her body, leaving only the 
bones. 
After a time he went to the third underground house and did the same 
thing, with like results. When he had returned home and gone to sleep 
after putting the fourth girl on the island, the sisters became angry at their 
brother; and they pitied the girl, and also the people who had thus lost 
three of their daughters. So, taking some robes and their brother's canoe, they went to the island, where they found the girl nearly frozen. They 
wrapped her up warmly in the robes, and told her what to do. They made 
a hole for her to hide in close to the landing-place, telling her to remain 
there until Close-cut-Hair had fastened the canoe and gone up the island, 
when she was to jump in and push off. The sisters then returned and tied up 
the canoe where it had been before. Early next morning Close-cut-Hair repaired 
to the island, expecting to have a choice breakfast. He landed in the usual 
place, and hastened up over the island to look for the body. Then the girl 
jumped into the canoe and pushed out into the stream. As soon as Close 
cut-Hair saw this, he turned back and begged to be taken on board. The 
girl said, “If you cut your hair shorter even than it is, and take off all your   
1 5pik a warclub or shortaword generally made of wood or hom, aod sometimes of bone. Those of wapit or clk hom were the commonest kind in use.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 271 
clothes and throw them into the stream, 1 will take you on board.” As soon as Close-cut-Hair had done this, she began to whistle, and a cold wind blew, which eventually froze Close-cut-Hair to death. Then the sisters told the girl to go home to her people and tell them all about her adventure, and also to relate the fate of the other three girls. This she did, and the people 
bewailed the tragic deaths of their daughters, whom they had supposed hap- pily married.

----

VI. — ANCESTOR TALES FROM SPUZZUM. 
37. The Origin of the Wau'us Mask. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
Some people of the Fraser Delta tribes (S'a'telnko) lived formerly at a 
place called Wau'us! Among them was a boy who was troubled with large 
swellings on the body (fomkomz’z) and was unable to find a cure. Since 
there was no relief for him, he expressed a wish to die, and wandered aimlessly 
about on the mountains to the east of the Hope trail, until he reached the 
source of a creek. Here he came to a lake, and, wishing to drown himself, he jumped in. He sank until he almost reached the bottom of the lake, 
where he came in contact with the roof of a house. This was inhabited by 
water-spirits or water-people (razaa'tho), who, hearing the thud of the lad 
striking the roof, sent one of their number out to see what was the matter. 
He came back, and reported that a stranger was resting on the roof of their 
house. He was ordered to bring him inside. As the lad entered, he saw sitting in the doorway a woman holding an 
infant, and he spat on the latter as he passed. The child at once became 
sick with the same disease as himself. The people sent to a neighboring 
lake for a medicine-man, but after several trials the latter declared he was 
unable to cure the child. Then some of the old people said, “Ask the 
stranger to treat the child. He must be a medicine-man, or at least possessed 
of much power and knowledge; otherwise he could never have come to our 
dwelling” They asked the lad to doctor the sick infant; but he said, “I 
am sick myself, and came here to get cured. If you cure me, I will treat 
your child” Then they brought medicine of different kinds® and anointed 
his whole body with it, until he became well. When he saw that they had 
cured him, he spat on the child, and it became well also. 
The people were very well pleased because he had cured the child, and 
they treated him very kindly; but after a time he became tired of staying 
there, and desired to go home to his own people. So the chief selected four 
of his people to conduct the lad home. They were Beaver, Mink, Otter, 
and Loon. After going a considerable distance, they lost their way, and had 
to return. Some days afterwards they tried it again, Beaver leading the way. 
Wherever they travelled, the water gave way before them, and stood back, leaving a passage like a tunnel. At last they came out on the earth, and   
1 They say this place is theee miles east of Hope. Some say that this was also the name of the lad. 2 Evidently decoctions of herbs. 
[272]

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 273 
a small lake formed at the place. Here his friends left him, and returned 
by the same way they had come. Before departing they told him that on 
the following day they would send him a blanket or covering! The chief 
had also told him this before he left the lake-people’s house. 
After resting a while, the lad went home, and, seeing his brothers and 
sisters, said to them, “I am your brother. Don't you see me? But they 
could not see him, because he had made himself invisible. After he had 
talked to them three times, he made himself visible, and they saw him. Then 
he met his parents, and talked three times to them in like manner. He told 
them to clean their house, so that he might enter. They did so, and spread 
mats and fresh boughs in the house, and also as a path for him to walk on: 
then he entered and sat down. 
On the next morning he went out to meet the lake-people who were to 
bring the blanket or present, and the people followed him at some distance 
behind. He met them not very far from the house. Wherever they had 
trod, springs burst out, or pools formed, which may be seen at the present 
day. They delivered to him their present, which consisted of a mask (szmam- 
kai’n?). It had wings at the sides, and two bird's beaks in front, and was 
covered with swan-feathers for hair. He wore this mask, and became a very 
important man. He used it in dances and at feasts. He carved a figure of 
it on his house-post and grave-post. It.descended to his children and des- 
cendants, who alone were entitled to use it. One of this man’s descendants 
married among the Spuzzum people, and their children used it at dances. 
38. The Origin of the Tsatsa'kwe ¢ Mask. 
(Lower Uta'mqt) 
A girl lived in the S'a'tcinko country near Yale She was so disobedient 
that her parents could do nothing with her. At last they beat her soundly, 
poured urine on her face, and turned her outside. Her uncle took pity on 
her, and, taking her to his house, hid her. Her parents, who had in the 
mean time relented, and were somewhat ashamed of their cruel conduct   
+ This was to be in payment of his services in curing the child. * Literally, “mavitowhead.” This word is wsed by the Ui¥mq to demote a mask or mystery headdress used in dances. It is from the word sEndn (*maniton,” or perional guardian spirit) and -bain, the compound form of their word for head; -kain is also a compound form for any word meaning a covering for the head.” In this scose the word would mean “28am or maniion hat, cap, o covering for the head” This i soexse of the Kwakiutl, see Frans Boss, The Social Organisation and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians, Avsual Report of the U. S. Notions] Museum for 1895, pp. 497, 516. 3 There were only two masks used by the Utt'mqt people. They belonged to two Spuszum families who were half Swcinko, and had obtained them through their Swtcinko relationship. They were introduced in recent years within the memory of people now very old. S'clako word meaning “Gah” or “salmon.” © Yale is the uppermost village of the Sa'tclako on Fraser River, therefore the nearest 10 the Utimat.      
  

----

274 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
towards their daughter, searched for her, but could not find her. They did 
not know what had become of her. 
The girl was sorrowful because her parents had cast her off, and she felt ashamed because of the way they had treated her, therefore she made 
up her mind to do away with herself. She wandered off to a lake in the 
mountains, where she saw many fish swimming in the water. She sat down 
to watch them. They changed themselves to the form of small children with 
very long hair, and came to the surface of the water, where they smiled at 
her and watched her. She said to herself, “I should like to live with these 
people, they all seem so kind and happy!” So she threw herself into the 
water to drown herself, for she thought by so doing she might join them. 
As soon as she fell into the water, a violent wind blew over the country, 
and blew down her parents’ house. She found she could not sink, so she 
came ashore again. When she left the water, it became calm; and on looking 
into the lake, she could see neither fish nor children. They had all disappeared, but she had obtained possession of the power and knowledge of wind. She 
went back to her people, and afterwards married and had a numerous family. This story became the possession of her family and descendants, who carved 
pictures of it on their grave-boxes, and used masks representing fsatsa’bue, 
which they used in their dances at potlatches. Some of her descendants also 
possessed or inherited the knowledge of wind, and could make it blow when 
they willed. 
This story was related by an old man called Tkwa’n, who is half S'a'tcinko, 
and inherited it from his Yale ancestors. He alone, of all the Spuzzum people, 
had the right to use this mask and carving, and he introduced it there by 
carving it on the gravebox of his children and using the mask at dances. 
The only other people having the right to this story, mask, and carving are 
relatives of his belonging to Yale. 
30. The Beaver who Made People. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
Beaver lived in a small underground house! near a pool on the lower 
part of Spuzzum Creek. The pool was ‘mystery water” (zazaa'tho). His 
sister lived on the opposite or eastern side of the Fraser River. They were 
the only inhabitants of the country at that time. They wished that the 
country might be peopled: so Beaver made (or created) people to inhabit the country?   
| The uoderground house is situated about a mile or less from the mouth of the creck, on the upper. or northern side. Near it there used to be rather large stone somewhat resembling a hammer in shape, which the Todiaos called “The Beaver's hammer” or “peste” (1w'2hir). 1 visited the site myself, * The Indiass could oot tell in what manner he created them, nor of what substance (if asy) he made them.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 275 
After he had made many people, his sister told him one day that a 
man was approaching from below (down the river) who metamorphosed every- 
thing: therefore he fled to the mountains around the upper part of the creek; 
while his sister took refuge on the top of a high mountain above Yale, on 
the opposite side of the river from that place, from which she could watch 
the stranger. The Transformer, on his way up the river, came to the people which 
Beaver had created at Spuzzum, and metamorphosed them.! Then he returned 
down the river again. After he had gone, Beaver returned home and began 
to make people, as before. Some time after this Beaver's sister again warmed him of the Trans- 
former's approach, and again they fled into the mountains. Upon his arrival 
at Spuzzum, the stranger metamorphosed the people as he had on the first 
occasion. 
Thus he came yet a third time, and did the same thing. Then Beaver's 
sister said, “If he comes again, we will not run away, but will stay with 
the people, and see what he will do to us” Therefore, upon the Trans 
former's arrival for the fourth time, they remained where they were; and the 
Great Chief (or Transformer)? turned the sister into a mountain-peak (the 
same one from which she watched his approach), and her brother he changed 
into the animal beaver, saying, “You shall no longer make people.” It is 
not related that the Transformer killed or metamorphosed the people the last 
time: therefore it is supposed by some that these people of Beaver's creation 
were probably the ancestors of the people there at the present days viz., the 
Spuzzum people. 
40. The Origin of the Spuzzum People. 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
There were four underground houses at Spuzzum Creek, — two on the south side of the stream, and two on the north side. One of the latter was 
inhabited by zaxa’® A father and son belonging to one of the houses on 
the south side of the creek were away hunting in the mountains down the 
river. At that time the people of Spuzzum did not know of any other people 
living farther down the river. In the course of their wanderings, the two men came upon a village of 
strange people. On approaching, they were welcomed and treated kindly,   
3 The Indians could not tell me in what manner the transformation took place, bor into what they were, changed. Some claimed that he simply killed then. #16 is said that the Transformer who did these things was the Geeat Chief, probably God. 3 Said to be the same axa’ who are mentioned ia other stories as living in the deep underground house 
(see p. 277). 
35—JRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXFED., VOL. VAL

----

276 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
although their languages were mutually unintelligible. They must have be- 
longed to the coast tribes. They saw many strange things there, among them 
a copper hammer, to which they took a great fancy, and, before departing, 
purchased it, as well as an elk-horn chisel. On reaching home, they showed their wonderful purchase to their friends ; 
and the people of all the houses, including the raza’ people, flocked to see 
it. After all had examined it, they repaired to their respective houses and 
went to sleep; but none of those who had looked at or had touched the 
copper hammer awoke again. They all died that night. 
Now it happened that at the time there were two young men away 
training in the mountains. They belonged to one of the houses on the south 
side of the creek; and on their return home, they found all the people dead. 
They entered the other house, and found all the people dead there also; 
then they crossed the creek to the house of the raza’, but found them dead 
likewise. Then they repaired to the remaining house, where the people were 
also dead excepting an old woman and her two young grand-daughters, who 
were the only people who had not gone to see the wonderful copper hammer 
and the chisel. The two young men were very glad to find some one alive, 
and took up their abode with the survivors. They all lived together in one 
house. 
After the girls had come of age and had finished their training, their 
grandmother said to them, “You must marry these two men who have helped 
to support you so long. You must become their wives and beget children, 
so that we may not become extinct in this place.” Therefore the girls married 
the two men, and they had numerous children, from whom it is said most 
of the Spuzzam people are descended.*   
41. The Dog People.* 
(Lower Uta'mqt) 
The Dog people lived in an underground lodge near Spuzzum. Their 
house was called Zaxa?lx (*dog-housc”), and had a false floor. Strangers 
upon entering, and when about to leave the bottom of the ladder to step on 
the floor, tumbled down into a pit of greath depth, where they were killed 
and eaten by the Dog people, who never came forth except at night.   
1 Some say they were brothers. 2 Some say that all the real Spurmm people are descendants of these two couples; but some of the people now + Spuszum belonged originally to farther up the river and are not seal Spusum people. 3 These may be the same people as those described in the story of the deep underground house, (see         
pam).

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 277 
42. The Deep Underground House. 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
There were two underground houses close together near the mouth of 
Spuzzum Creek. One was inhabited by Indians; while the other, which was 
very deep, was inhabited by a strange people or raza’! who never came out 
of their house in the daytime. It is said that the young men of the one 
house repaired at night to the outside of the other house, and, gathering up 
all the chips, etc., swept the ground quite clean; and on the following night 
the zaza’ young men repaired to the outside of the Indian's house, and did 
likewise. Thus they did these favors alternately for one another, and the 
outside of their houses was always clean. 
They never entered one another's houses; and if an Indian wished to 
shell something to the axa’, he took it to their house and lowered it down 
with a rope. The zaza took it off at the bottom, and, tying in its place 
the equivalent of whatever the Indian wished in return, the latter pulled it 
up and took possession of it. If, however, a stranger came to trade from 
up the river, and, not knowing the ways of these people, descended the ladder 
into their underground house, as soon as he reached the bottom, he fell in 
a fit? Then the xaxd’ carried him to the top of the ladder and threw him 
outside, were after a time he recovered, and never again evinced any desire 
to enter their underground house. 
These people were possessed of much magic. Whenever they wished 
to have a fire, they cut some sticks up in small pieces, and, plecing them 
down on the fireplace, they turned their backs to the wood and said in a 
loud voice, “Take fire!” (in the Yale language) and immediately the sticks blazed. 
  
+ saga are mysterious, wonderful, supemataral, etc. The word rae’ has the same sigaificance as the Dakota term waka®. They are sad to have spoken the Vale language. 3A ft of violent convulsions. Some say the people, when they stepped off the bottom of the ladder (on to what they thought was the fioor), fll down out of sight, and never came back. The house had + hole in the floor, which was very deep or bottomless.

----

VII. — SEMI-HISTORICAL TALES. 
43. The War-Party that killed the Sturgeon. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A long time ago a war-party of Utd'mqt went to attack the E'yut of 
Fort Douglas; but, although they hovered around there for some time, they 
were unable to surprise their enemies, and, deeming themselves too few in 
number to make an open attack, they returned. On their way home they 
were unable to find any game, and were reduced to the verge of starvation. 
When they had reached the lake called Pa’pilt¢’m, near the head of Spuzzum 
Creek! they saw a huge sturgeon in the middle of the lake. Only a very 
narrow embankment confined the waters of the lake. It was very deep on 
the lower side, but on its upper side the water of the lake was just even 
with the top. They made a halt here; and, after holding a consultation, 
they agreed to cut the embankment so as to let the lake run dry, and thus 
to capture the sturgeon, which they wished for food. As soon as they set to work doing this, two of the young men became 
afraid, and ran away to a distant point, from which they watched their com- 
rades at work. Before long the people had made a cut in the bank, and 
the water began to flow out. As the water ran, it made the cut deeper and 
larger, and thus itself increased momentarily in volume and speed. Shortly 
after the water had started to run, black bears floated out with it. After these 
came many dogs, and at last came people, mostly women, who, as they 
floated, sat weaving goat'shair blankets, and seemed all-unconscious that 
anything was wrong. 
The lake ran almost dry, and left the sturgeon stranded in the middle, 
where it had first been seen. Then the men attacked it with their spears, 
and, after killing it, cut up its flesh, which they at once began to roast and 
boil. After feasting heartily, they all lay down on the lakeshore to rest 
themselves, and, feeling drowsy, fell asleep. None of them ever awoke again. 
Then the two young men ran down to where their friends were on the 
Fraser River, near Spuzzam, and told them all that had happened. After relating their story, they went, mad, and, biting themselves like dogs, shortly 
afterwards died. The water from the lake ran down, and has continued to 
do so to the present day, thus forming one of the feeders of Spuzzum Creek. The water-spirits (razaa’tko), in the shape of bears, dogs, and people, floated   
Some say there wes mo creck befor, and that this was the way that Spusasm Creek originated. 
[278)

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 279 
down with the stream; but some of them stopped in each of three large pools in the main creek, and consequently these pools are considered wonderful (zaza’) 
at the present day. Some of the waterspirits also stopped at the waterfall near the mouth of the creck. Persons (especially strangers) who repair to 
these places at the present day are often unknowingly seized with sickness, 
while others see apparitions of the water-spirits in the shape of black bears, 
dogs, or people, or hear dogs yelping from the water, and immediately after- 
wards they become ill. In either case, persons attacked with this peculiar 
sickness turn mad and bite themselves. If they are not at once attended to 
by a medicine-man who understands the water-spirits of the creek, they usually 
die. Formerly young men used to repair to the pools and waterfall of this 
creck, where they trained themselves to become medicine-men. 
44. The Strange People discovered by the S'atcinko. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A people, who were S'a’tcinko, lived at the head of a creek which takes 
its rise in a lake called Cultus Lake, situated in the hills back of Chilliwhack. 
They lived near the place where the waters flow out of the lake, and they 
fished plenty of salmon and other kinds of fish at this place. They had lived 
there a long time, and yet they knew very little about the lake which was 
so near to them. The country right at the source of the creck and all 
around the lake was a tangled forest, rocky and impassable owing to the 
thick underbrush: consequently the S'a’tcinko, who lived on the creek, never 
attempted to penetrate it. One day two young men from the creek were out hunting in the neigh- 
boring hills, and from a distant eminence they obtained a good view of the 
lake. To their surprise, they beheld a wreath of smoke rising from the 
timber near the lake's edge. They thought it must be smoke from some 
camp: so they approached the lake from the direction opposite to the creck, 
and found that the country was not so tangled as around their own home, 
near the outlet of the lake. After a long walk they arrived at the place 
where they had seen the smoke, and were astonished to find many people living there. These people lived principally by fishing in the lake, and knew 
nothing of the S'ateinko who lived so near to them. They talked in a 
language which was unintelligible to the S'tcinko, and was said to be similar 
to a language spoken by a tribe of Indians on the American side, west of 
the Cascades. These people thought the young men were interior or Thompson 
Indians, of whom they scemed to know. The chief gave a wife to each of 
the S'a'tcinko young men, who, returning home, informed their people that a 
people almost as numerous as themselves were living on the lake.

----

280 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
These two peoples had been living for generations within a mile or so 
of each other, and neither knew of the other. Then the Sa'tcinko set to 
work and cleared the upper part of the creek and adjoining lake of all ob- 
structions, and also made trails along the banks to the village of these people. 
After communication had been established by canoe and trail between the two 
villages, intercourse between the two peoples became frequent, and they inter- 
married one with the other. Eventually the lake people were absorbed by 
the S'a'tcinko, whose language they adopted. The last person who could 
speak their language was a very old man, who died a few. years ago. 
45. The Strange People discovered by the Hunters 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
Some people travelled down Fraser River! and at last located a place 
where they intended to camp permanently. At that time they did not know 
of any people different from themselves, or of any language other than 
their own. 
One day two hunters who had been training wandered far away, and, 
coming to a lake, saw some people living in wooden houses. They hesitated 
to approach, because there were many people. At last, approaching boldly, 
they were surprised to hear the people talking in a language different from 
their own, and which they did not understand. Hitherto they had thought 
that all people spoke the same language. The people received them kindly, 
and made them marry and stay among them. 
After a time the hunters returned to their own country, taking their 
foreign wives along with them. After this the two people became known to 
each other, and occasionally the one tribe visited the other. The people thus discovered were probably S'a'telnko. This incident happened a very long 
time ago.   
+ The Uti'mgt who arrated this story said he saw this old man some years ago at a SWtetako gathering, and was at the same time told the details of the story as narrated above, but had heard fragments of it before that. 2 This story is evideotly about the same people as those mentioned ia No. 44, or it may possibly refer to a meeting with the Scloko. 2 Some say they travelled down the river uatil they reached a place at or below Spusum. 4 Some say the Jake was situated somewhere near or ialsod from Chilliwhack. Formerly Utt‘mqt hunters sed to huat occasionally on the hills as far west and south as there. The Sitclako seem to have done very litle huatiog at a distance from their homes, aod they seldom left the rivers.

----

VIII. — TALES ADOPTED FROM THE COAST-TRIBES. 
46. Mink! 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
Mink had two wives, — Willow-Grouse and Partridge. He did not care 
very much for either of his wives. He loved another woman, whom he 
constantly visited. After a time she died, and Mink was disconsolate. He 
told the people that he was dying of a broken heart, and asked them to 
place his body beside that of his love. He feigned death; and the people, 
thinking he was dead, took his body and placed it beside that of the woman 
he had loved, in a large grave box or house, which was situated on a 
prominent knoll close to and overlooking the river. Here he staid for some 
time, and had sexual intercourse with the dead woman. Sometimes he got 
tired, and, leaving the grave:box, repaired to the cdge of the knoll and 
watched the people in canoes going up and down the river. 
One day he saw some people in a canoe passing close underneath where 
he was hiding. He stood up, and said, “People, I am Mink. How are my 
wives, are they married yet? One of the men answered, “Yes, Willow 
Grouse is married” and Mink answered back, “I expected that” The people 
who had seen Mink related the incident when they got home, so some of 
them went to the grave-yard to find out if it were true. On reaching there, 
they found that Mink had disappeared, the body of the woman was in a 
wrong position, and some of the other bodies had also been disturbed. They 
believed that Mink had come to life agai 
Mink, after travelling away some- distance, came to a large house, (like 
those of the S'a’teinko or Coast Indians), where the people had killed many 
seals? and were feasting. He entered the house and sat down in the chief 
place The people were angry, and removed him to the lowest place, near 
the door, and gave him very little to cat. Mink felt insulted at this treat- 
ment, and, leaving the house, went to see his grandmother, who told him what to do. 
    
* Skaitsia is used us is proper mame. It is the Yale (Swtelnko) word for “mink.” Tobwalateln or TetwalW'ctn is the Thompson word for “mink” The Mink story among the Sitclako is a very log and important one, some of the incidents being somewhat similar to those in this story. Sc Boas, Sagen, pp 34 et seq. 2 Similar to the grave-boxes used among the Ui'mqt (ike). 3 There are no seals in the Ui'mat country; but occasionally they come as far up as Harrison Lake, and even to Vale. The Utk'mgt cal them by the S'tcinko ame. + Evideatly the place of honor, or scat, for the most distinguished person. 
[281]

----

282 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
He retired into the woods for several days, where he busied himself 
making first a large knife and then a wooden seal which he covered with 
sealskin. When he had finished the seal, he said to it, “Cry!” and it at 
once cried; “Move!” and it moved: so he was well pleased with his work. 
He commanded it to go to the house where the feast was still in progress. It entered, and sat down on the chief seat. The people ordered it to leave, 
but it would not go: therefore they attacked’ it with spears, but they only 
glanced off. Then the seal ran through the middle of them, and, reaching 
the water? swam around. All the young men took canoes and gave chase, 
intending either to capture or to kill it; but it dodged and dived so quickly 
that they could not get near enough to harm it. The seal came up under- neath the canoes and capsized them, and many of the people were drowned. 
After capsizing all the canoes, it disappeared and was seen no more. Some time afterwards Mink called all the deer from the mountains down 
to the riverbank. When they arrived, he told them all to stand in a row, 
with their tails towards him. After looking at them, he said, “You are not 
fat enough yet, you better go back to the mountains for a while longer.” 
So they all ran away to where they had come from. Again he called the 
deer, and, after looking at them, he told them they were too lean. On the 
third occasion he considered them fat enough, therefore ordered them to 
embark in his canoe, which they did. When they were all on board, he 
paddled across the river to his grandmother's house, and, on entering, said 
to the old woman, “My canoe is full of fat deer. Go down and drive them 
up” She went down; but although she ordered them out of the canoe, and 
afterwards tried to drive them with a stick, they refused to move. She came 
back and told Mink that she was unable to drive them, therefore he went 
down and commanded them to get out of the canoe. This they did. Then 
he told them to march up to the house, but this they would not do: instead 
they all ran away up the mountainside, laughing at Mink, who felt quite 
crestfallen. 
Shortly after this he said to his younger brother, Marten, “Let us go 
to the place where the salmon go in and out” Although somewhat afraid 
Marten agreed to this. Now, at this time the Lower Fraser River® was 
blocked by a “mystery” (zaxa)* in the shape of a very large fish! that 
occupied the whole width of the river with its huge body, which was also 
very high and stretched across the river like a fog-bank. This creature. had 
an immense mouth, which extended right through its body like a passage; 
and when it closed it, nothing could pass up or down the river, but when it   
  1 Some say they threw spears at it. = Some say the rive 3 Some part of the river between Harrison River and the mouth of the Fraser. 4 A mysterious being, possessed of great medic 5 Some say a whale, or, rather, give the Swicinko name for whale, They have no very clear ides of what a whale is like, except that it is a large fib with, a big mouth.   
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 283 
opened it the salmon! passed through to the waters above. As long as its 
mouth was open, the salmon went in and out. Mink and Marten went down- 
stream in their canoe until they came to the monster, which had its mouth 
open. The salmon were very thick round about, and were passing in and 
out. They paddled their canoe into its mouth, which closed at once. They 
were thus imprisoned, and could not get out either way. Marten became 
afraid, and wished to cut his way out; but Mink said, “There is no hurry. 
Salmon are plentiful here. We will catch them and eat them.” So they 
staid in the monster's belly for several days, catching salmon. They broke 
up their canoe and made fire-wood of it to cook their salmon. All the hair 
fell out of their heads except eight hairs. After they had burned up their 
canoe, Mink said, “I will cut off the zaxa’s heart;” but Marten was afraid, 
and told him not to do so. Mink, however, persisted. It was hanging right 
above their heads, and was as large as a big basket? Mink cut off the 
heart, and at once the xaza’ went into his death-struggles. He took a long 
time to die, and flopped and rolled up the river until he came to the place 
where Harrison River leaves the lake. Here he expired at last, and lay still. 
Mink called on the birds to help them, and they began to pick at the corpse, 
but could not make a hole large enough or of sufficient depth for them to 
pass out. 
The inhabitants of the place heard the noise of people talking, and 
hurried to the spot. They said, “It is Mink. Let us kill him!" Armed 
with spears they surrounded the hole. Mink cut through from below until 
he could see just'a little daylight. Then he tied his eight hairs together, 
and, tightening his belt, told his brother to take a firm hold of it. He made 
himself and his brother invisible, and passed out through the hole with his 
brother clinging to his belt. When a safe distance away, he changed himself 
and brother back to their natural forms, and began to laugh at the people, 
who were still surrounding the hole. The people were angry when they saw 
him, and said, “It is Mink. He has escaped.” 
47. Skaiya'm. 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
An old woman named Skaiya’m lived all alone. There were no other 
inhabitants in the country where she lived. She desired to have a husband 
and children, but she did not know where to find any man: so she created 
  
1 Some think that the simon belonged to him. They say the salmon never weat very far away from its mouth, s Stak a are, round or oblong basket with id, made by the Thompion Indias. + See Boss, Seen, p. 35. 
36—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC XXFED., VOL. VEL.

----

284 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
two girls out of fish-roe, and called them her grand-daughter. They grew 
up to be young women, and desired to have husbands; but of course their 
grandmother could not help them to gratify their wish. 
Then Skaiya'm thought of a scheme. She feigned sickness, and told the 
girls, in the event of her death, to put her body in the canoe, and also her favorite antler chisel and stone hammer. Then she feigned death; and the 
young women, thinking she was dead, put her in the canoe, which was always 
kept moored near shore or tied to the bank. Before long she cut the canoe 
adrift and floated downstream. As the water had risen a little, the girls 
thought the canoe had broken adrift, and they said, “The canoe with our 
grandmother's body has broken away.” 
Skaiya’m went ashore away downstream, and fixed herself up to resemble 
a man. She tied the loose skin of her breasts in a knot under each armpit, 
so that her chest resembled that of a man and was without wrinkles. She painted her face, and fastened on the chisel for a penis, and the hammer for 
testicles. After she thought herself sufficiently disguised, she embarked in her 
canoe and paddled upstream. Her grand-daughters saw her coming, and 
thought it was a man. She slept with them that night and had intercourse 
with them. Next morning they were very sore, and were also suspicious. They said, “We will find out what kind of a man this is” So they caught 
hold of Skaiya'm, and one of them tickled the soles of her fect, thus forcing 
her to laugh. As soon as she laughed, they knew who it was. Then Skaiya'm 
talked to them in her natural voice, and acknowledged that she had only 
feigned death. On examining her, they found her false privates, which they 
took and threw away. They were angry at Skaiya'm for deceiving them: 
so they took her to the river and drowned her. She laughed as she sank, 
and the airbubbles rose to the surface of the water. That is the reason 
that we sometimes see bubbles rise to the surface of the water. It is Skaiya'm 
laughing.! Then the young women travelled down the river, and after a time came 
in sight of a house,” which they entered. Here they found an old blind 
woman nursing a baby (her grandson). They said to her, “How dirty your 
baby is! Why don't you wash it? Give it to us. We will wash and clean 
it for you” So the.old woman gave them the baby to wash. Then one of 
them concealed it, while the other one put a picce of rotten wood in the 
cradle in its stead. They said, “Now rock your baby, we have put it back 
in the cradle” So the old woman began to rock the cradle, while the two 
women ran away as fast as they could. 
After some time the old woman discovered the trick which had been 
played on her, and summoned her husband, who was fishing on the river,   
1 Some say she became a yazadrho of waterspirit. * Some say the house was a loog wooden one, like those used by the Sielake.   
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 285 
to her aid. They sent their son, who was a young man, in pursuit of the 
women. The old woman drew up the loose skin of her breasts into a bunch, 
and at once the distance between pursued and pursuer became short, for by 
her magic the surface of the earth became contracted like the skin of her 
breasts. The young man had almost overtaken the fugitives when the old 
woman, getting tired, let go the skin of her breasts, and, the earth expanding 
again, he found himself a long distance behind. The old woman did this, 
all together, three times, but cach time with like result: so the young man 
returned without having overtaken the thieves. 
Then the old woman, who was determined to have a grandson, made 
the rotten wood into a baby boy. This boy grew up to be a man, and went 
hunting. His elder brother, who had been stolen by the women, also grew 
to be a man, and lived with them as their husband. 
One day the two brothers met while hunting in the mountains, and after 
much questioning identified each other. The elder accompanied the younger 
on a visit to the old man and woman, and afterwards returned to his wives 
the roe-women, taking his younger brother with him. He gave one of them 
to him, and thus the women thenceforth had each a husband. 
48. Made-her-sit-down-on-a-Seat (ukwd/patém).! 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A man lived with his wife in an underground house which formed one 
of a group of such houses. His relatives lived with him in the same house, 
while most of his wife's relatives lived in one of the adjoining houses. His 
wife went gathering stats (the inside bark of cedar) every day, and always 
came back loaded with the very best kind. She went oftener than was 
necessary, and generally staid away all day. She dressed herself in her best 
clothes, and took much care with her toilet before departing. These actions 
aroused the suspicions of her husband, who made up his mind to watch her. 
He followed her into the forest next day until she stopped in front of a tall, shapely cedartree’ Then he hid himself and watched. The cedar 
changed itself into a man, tall and good-looking, and approached the woman, 
who received him affectionately and embraced him. They had sexual inter- course with each other, and lay together all day. Towards evening the man 
gave her a large bundle of the finest cedar-bark, which she put on her back 
to carry home; and when she departed, he changed himself back into the 
tall cedar-tree.   
+ Lbwi'patim sigoifies “made ber sit down on & seat,” or, more literally, “set her [or him or them) on something” (Lkwdpim, “to sit down on a seat’ Lbudptin, “seat or chair” “thing to sit down on”). See Boas, 
Sagem, pp- 89, 96, 123. 2 Some say a tree about two feet and a half in diameter, straight, and with very few limbs.        

----

286 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Having obtained full evidence of his wife's guilt, the husband hurried 
home, and next morning told her that he would accompany her to gather 
cedar-bark. He took her to the same tree! which had changed itself into a 
man the day before, saying to her, “This is a fine tree, and has nice bark. 
Let us climb to the top of it and start stripping the bark from there.” . When 
they reached the top, he cut it into a sharp point, and, making the woman 
strip herself naked, he placed her? on the top with the sharp point inserted 
in her privates. After tying her securely, he stripped the bark off all around 
the tree for a considerable distance down, and then, descending, went home. 
She cried to her youngest brother for help (his name was Xoxblameya), 
but he did not hear her at first. At last he heard her cries and found where 
she was; but, seeing that he was unable to render her any assistance, he ran 
home and told the people, who at once hurried to the scene. 
She was dying then from the effects of the hot sun, loss of blood, and 
the great pain. She said to the people, “I am dying. You cannot rescue 
me. The sun is hot, and you may be thirsty; but do not eat the berrics 
which you see growing underneath (or at the foot of) this tree, because they 
are drops of my blood.” The berries were blackberries. 
The people began to climb the tree to try to rescue her; but none of 
them could pass the barked part, because it was so slippery. At last they 
got Snail to attempt it; but, although he was able to climb over the barked 
part, he took so long to reach the top, that the woman had expired before 
he got there. He released her and took the body down, and the people 
buried it. 
Now, it happened that the woman had another brother who was exactly 
like herself in height, build, complexion, voice, and features. He dressed 
himself up in her clothes, and a few days afterwards he repaired to the hus- 
band's house. He said to his brother-in-law, “Im am your wife. I was not 
really dead, although the people thought I was”4 The brother-in-law, as 
well as the other people in the house, believed this story, so the supposed 
wife went to bed with her husband; but when the latter wished to become 
too familiar, the former pushed him away, saying, *You must desist for a 
few days. That was a terrible injury you did to me. You surely don't 
expect me to be healed yet.” 
One night, after his brother-in-law and all the people were asleep, he 
pulled out his knife, which he had concealed on his person, and killed his 
brother-in-law by cutting his throat. Then he suddenly left the house. Next 
morning, before it was quite light, a boy in the house said to his grand- 
  
+ Some say to an equally fine tree, but a different one. ® Some say made her sit down on. 2 The berries known as blackberries, black raspberries, or brambles. # Some say that he said, “I am your wife come back to life again.” 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 287 
mother (the husband's mother), “I will go to my elder brother's bed and lie down with him for a while’ (the boy had been in the habit of doing this 
some mornings); but the old woman, hearing a subdued sort of noise, said, 
Do not bother your elder brother this morning. Don't you hear him? He 
is making a nephew for you." 
The sound she heard was that of the blood gurgling and dripping from 
the dead man’s wound. As the sound continued, the mother thought to herself! 
“He remains long having connection with his wife this morning!” Then she 
said, “Get up, child, and wash yourself. It is morning; but still the sound 
continued. When it was really light, the people discovered him lying dead 
with his throat cut. 
49. Burned-Themseves (O'iateu’t)? 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
In a certain place there were four underground houses close together, and the children and young people of these houses used to play together. 
A girl belonging to one of the houses was visited nights by a young man 
who lay beside her. She could not find out who he was, and thought he 
must be a stranger: so she watched the young men in the daytime when 
they played games, but could not detect any stranger among them. At last 
she granted the young man’s desires, and became still more anxious to find 
out who he was. One night she rubbed paint made of red ochre and grease 
on her hands, and when the young man lay with her, she drew her hands 
down his back. Early next morning she watched the young men as they 
went to bathe to sec which of them had the red marks on his back. To 
her horror she discovered that it was her elder brother, and next night, when 
he came to her, she reproached him bitterly for deceiving her. 
Being ashamed, they fled to the hills, breaking the ends of branches 
here and there as they went along. They selected a place to stay in, erected 
a lodge and lived together as husband and wife. After a time a son was 
born to them. He grew very quickly, and one day after looking hard at 
his parents, he said, “You look very much like each other” Again he 
looked at them, and said, “Your faces are both alike.” Thus he looked at 
them, and addressed them in this manner four times. His parents said to 
each other, “Our son makes us fecl ashamed: we will send him away to his 
grandparents.” 
The father hunted every day, and was very successful. Their lodge was 
full of dried meat. Each night when he came home, he brought some pitch-   
1 The old woman or mother is represented as always talking in the Swtciako language. 2 Literally, “burn (or set fire to) himself (or themselves)” See Boas, Sagen, p. 37.

----

288 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
wood! with him, which he split up in thin strips and placed them in between 
the poles or framework of the lodge. Before very long he had hundreds of 
these pitch-sticks stuck here and there all over the framework on the inside 
of the lodge. They told the boy they wished him to go to his grandparents 
on a visit for a while, and gave him four gloves filled with fat meat and 
other things as a present to the old people. They directed him how to go, 
and said if he followed the line of broken branches he could not go astray. 
They also told him not to look back on any account, but before he had 
gone a great distance, his curiosity was so great that he looked back and 
saw a great smoke ascending from his parents’ house, which was in flames. 
After their son had departed, the parents set fire to their lodge, then, lying down and covering themselves up, they allowed themselves to be burned 
to death, The large amount of pitch-wood in the house caused the great 
smoke. The boy reached his grandparents and remained with them.   
» Some say he walked home with a staf of pitch-wood every night.

----

IX. — TALES BASED ON EUROPEAN FOLKLORE. 
50. A'ilut! 
(Lower Uta'mgt) 
A man once gambled away everything he possessed, including even his 
wives and children. He felt so much ashamed of himself, that he would not 
stay among the people, and wandered away’ alone, altogether destitute of 
clothing with the exception of an apron of firbranches, and feeling very 
miserable. 
. When he came to a house, he heard something crying or singing. It 
‘was an invisible animal belonging to two women, who had seen him approach, 
and now invited him to enter their dwelling. As he was naked, he was 
ashamed to comply with their request, but they seized hold of him and forcibly 
pulled him into the house. They washed him and gave him clothes to put 
on, and then asked him where he was travelling to. He said, “I do not 
know exactly where I am going, but I intend to visit strange and distant lands.” They said, “If you are going on a distant journey, it will be much 
better if you ride a horse” He answered, “But there are no horses here.” 
They said, “Go outside and walk once around our lodge, and you will see.” 
So he walked around the lodge, following the sun's course; and when he came to the door again, he saw two fine-looking horses inside, but did not see the women. After walking around the lodge again, he came to the door, 
and, looking in, saw the two women, but no horses. They said to him, 
“Don’t you wish to ride?” and he answered, “No.” Then they told him to 
walk around the lodge again. He walked round once, and, looking in, saw 
the horses; and walking around the second time, he found they were gone, 
and the women were in their places. The women changed themselves into 
horses and back into human form. Although they asked him to ride again, 
he refused, and told them he intended to resume his journey on foot. 
On his departure, they gave him a knife® and a belt, which he put 
on. When he came to a lake, he threw the end of his belt across, and it 
formed a bridge, on which he crossed over. When he was halfway across, 
he saw many beavers swimming about. One of them struck him with his tail, and knocked him off the bridge, so that he fell into the water. Then, 
they conveyed him to their house. Here they told him that they were in   
+ AY, a loser (at gambling); a person who is always unlucky at gambliog. 2 Some say it was an axe that was given to him. 
[289]

----

290 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
sore straits because of their inability to cut trees: so he told them to open 
their mouths, and he would make them able to cut trees. As each one 
opened its mouth, he threw his knife into it, and thus they became able to cut 
down trees. Then they conducted him to the bridge, and he went on his way. 
Before long he met a young man, who asked him where he was going. 
He answered, ‘I am going to a distant land to sce strange people.” The 
young man said, “In the next country are strange people, and a zara’! there 
has a pretty daughter, whom you may desire to marry. If you wish her, I 
can get her for you; but you have not sufficient magical powers to obtain 
her yourself.” He answered, “I shall be glad to marry her if you can get 
her for me” So the young man went to secure her. He found her alone 
in her lodge, for she was a young girl; and was sitting there whistling on 
her fluted He told her that a man from a far country sought her, and was 
waiting for her some distance away, and that he would conduct her to him. 
She consented, and, after spitting on her whistle (that it might continue 
to whistle), she departed with the young man, and, joining A'ilul, they all 
journeyed together back towards the lake. 
The girl was not missed for several days; but at last some of the people 
said to her father, “Your daughter does not whistle so loudly as is her wont.” 
He said, “She may be getting tired of whistling.” Again they informed him, 
“Your daughter has ceased whistling altogether:” so he went to her lodge, 
and found that she was gone. Then he went to his wife and informed her 
that their daughter was not in her lodge, and that he was afraid she had 
been stolen. His wife looked over the world, and saw their daughter travelling 
with two men towards a lake, so she despatched her husband in pursuit. 
When he came near, the girl changed herself into an old woman, her hus- 
band into an old man, and the young man into a dog. She created an old 
dilapidated lodge near the trail, and they sat down inside. Her father did 
not recognize her. He inquired of the old couple if they had seen any people 
pass that way. Since they denied all knowledge of the fugitives, he gave 
up the pursuit and went home. 
When he reached home, his wife was angry with him, and said, “Why 
did you come back without your daughter? She deceived you. It was she 
who ‘appeared as an old woman.” Then the husband and wife both started 
in pursuit, and drew near to the fugitives as they reached the lake. A'ilut 
threw down his belt on the lake, and it became a bridge as before, upon 
  
  a, a person possessed of much mystery of magical power; a mystery, or anything possessed of great   
* Zeomts, a giel at the age of puberty, aod undergoing her training. 3 A tube ‘made of bone with three or four holes in it, used by young men sad women as a whistle or fate, It was also used for drinking through, althoogh some used it entirely as fue, and drank through asother tube of bone which had no holes in it. Those with holes for whistling were seldom used by the Uma, asd seem to have been chiefly confined to the Upper Thompsons, Okanagon, nd southern Shuswap.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 201 
which they all crossed in safety. As the pursuers reached the middle of the 
bridge, the girl gave the belt a turn, and precipitated her parents into the 
water, where they were turned into ducks. 
When they reached A'lluT's country, the girl threw down a short stick, 
and it became a large house, in which they took up their abode. When she 
threw down another stick, slaves appeared to serve them. Then A'ilut gambled with all his former opponents, and won back all his possessions, 
and much more besides. He also recovered his wives and children, and they 
lived with him. 
51. The four children! 
(Lower Utamgt) 
A man had four children who annoyed him very much, and followed 
him wherever he went: so he devised a plan to get rid of them. He rolled 
up a long piece of thread on a recl, and the next time he went away he 
unwound it as he walked along. His children accompanied him, as usual. 
After travelling a considerable distance from home, they camped for the night. On the following morning he told the children he was going hunting and 
would not return for some time; but, if they would only wind up and follow 
the string, they would find their way home without any dificulty. They were 
not desirous of going home, however: so, when their father came back to 
the camp at night, he found them still there. 
Next day he travelled to another distant camp, where they staid for the 
night. On the way thither he gave them many pieces of phosphorescent 
wood? which he told them to scatter along the path, so that by their aid 
they might be enabled to find their way back. On the morrow he went 
hunting and did not return. The following day the children started for home, 
guiding themselves by the phosphorescence; but there was other phosphorescent wood in the forest besides what they had distributed, and thus by going from 
one light to another they were led astray and at last entirely lost. 
After travelling a long time, they came to the foot of a very tall tree; 
and the youngest of the four climbed up to obtain a view of the country, and thus, if possible, locate their position. He saw a wide, flat country? 
stretching all around, and away in the distance smoke ascending as if from 
a campfire. After passing the night at the foot of the tree, they proceeded 
next morning in the direction in which they had seen the smoke. Here they 
    
1 Some say they were four boys. 2 A kind of rotten, phosphorescent wood found in the forests and wet places. 3 There is practically no fist land in the Uti'mqt country, with the exception of litle beaches of a few acres in extent in some places. . 
37—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXFED. VOL. VIL

----

292 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
found a house, which they entered. The only inmate was an old woman, 
who treated them kindly and gave them food. She said her husband was a 
cannibal, and would be home about evening. If he found them, he would 
certainly eat them. Therefore towards sunset she hid them away. When the husband arrived, he said, “Htm, ham! 1 smell human flesh,” but his 
wife pacified him, and persuaded him that it was only imagination, and that 
no person had been there since he left. After he had gone to sleep, the children 
arose, and, stealing the cannibal’s magic staff, they took flight. When the 
cannibal awoke, he missed his staff, and, being aware of what had happened, 
he at once gave chase. He nearly overtook the children just as they were 
approaching a river; but they threw the staff down on the water, and it 
became a bridge, on which they crossed, and pulled the staff over just as 
the cannibal reached the opposite bank. The latter, being unable to cross, 
had to return home without his staff and without capturing the thieves. 
52. The wonderful Boy.! 
(Lower Uta'mgt.) 
Grisly Bear stole a pregnant woman and took her to his house. Her 
husband searched for her, but could not find her. Before long the captive 
woman bore a son, who soon grew up and was able to go hunting. Now, 
Grisly Bear's house had many doors, but they opened or shut only at command 
of their master:® so the woman and boy could not go out or in except Grisly 
Bear allowed them to do so. At last the lad learned the secret of opening 
and shutting the doors. One day Grisly Bear allowed him to go out hunting. 
He shot a deer a long distance away, and, as it was late in the day, he 
returned without carrying any of the carcass home. On the next day Grisly 
Bear went out to carry in the meat. When he had gone away, the boy 
opened two of the doors and let himself and his mother out. They returned 
to his mother’s home, but, on arriving there, found that his father had be- 
come an old man, for time went faster in the outside world than it did in 
Grisly Bear's house. His father was unable to recognize his wife, nevertheless 
he was glad to sec them. 
After staying some time at home, the lad told his father he intended to 
go to a distant country to look for work, and asked him to accompany him. 
After many days’ travel, they reached a country where there lived white 
people who had many ranches, and had clearcd the forest. The father 
applied for work, but they laughed at the idea of such an old man being   
1 This boy is named Jack by some. Compare this story with Tale XXXVIII, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 93. : * Some say they opened at his approach, and shut as soon he had passed.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 293 
able to chop trees. They gave him a job, however, to clear land, and pointed 
out a flat piece of forest of large extent, which they asked him to slash, stump, and fence. Then the lad ordered an axe of immense size to be made. 
The blacksmith was unable to lift it when it was finished, thercfore a team and wagon had to be hired to take it to the place. Now, the lad took the 
axe and began to fell the trees. In a few days he had chopped all the 
timber, taken out all the stumps, and erected a snake-fence around all the 
land. When the white men saw the work had been finished, they were 
astonished that the old man had been able to do such a large picce of work 
in such a short time. They did not know that it was the old man's son 
that had done it. 
When they had been paid for their work, the lad bought much food, which he gave to his father to live on; then, leaving him there, he continued 
his journey. On the second day he reached a house on the trail which was 
inhabited by a young man who was half Grisly Bear. This man accompanied 
him on his journey. After two days’ travelling, they came to another house 
on the trail which was likewise inhabited by a young man who was half 
Grisly Bear. He also joined them on their travels. Journeying two days’ march farther, they arrived at a village of white people, where they all got 
employment clearing land. They took turns at cooking. One of them always 
staid in the house to cook for the other two who worked. 
One forenoon an old gray-bearded man visited their cabin. He said he 
was cold and wished to warm himself, therefore the young man who was 
cooking asked him to come inside. He sat down close to the stove. Seeing 
some meat boiling, he asked for a spoon to sup the water of the meat with. 
The cook gave him a spoon; and when his back was turned, the old man 
threw some of the boiling water on him. He did this three times. Then 
the cook attacked him, and they had a severe fight; but the old man got 
the best of the cook, and gave him a thrashing. The young man went to 
bed without paying any more attention to the dinner which he had begun tor cook. At noon his companions came home from their work, and, finding 
no dinner ready, and the cook in bed, they wondered what was the matter. 
Next day one of the others staid at home to cook. He did not know 
what had happened to his companion the day before, for the latter had said 
nothing about his adventure, The gray-beard appeared as on the preceeding 
day, and acted in a like manner to the cook who tried to put him out and 
was thrashed for doing so. . On the third day the lad himself staid at home. The old man appeared 
as usual, and treated him as he had his companions; but the lad attacked him and beat him until he left him for dead, and then threw him outside. 
After dinner the lad went to work with his companions; and when they 
returned home in the evening, they found that the old man had revived and

----

204 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
gone away. Next day they followed his bloody tracks, and at last saw that 
they led to a house from which smoke was issuing. They attacked the house, which had three doors, — an outer, a middle, and an inner door. They 
broke them all, and, entering, attacked the old man, whom they killed. 
On looking around inside the house, they saw three boxes, and a great number 
of human bones and skulls scattered around. These people had been killed by the old man, for he was a cannibal and a robber. They burst open the 
boxes, and found that one was full of gold, one full of silver, and the other 
full of banknotes. They took possession of these riches, which they carried 
home. The lad gave the silver to the young man who had joined him last, 
and the notes to the other young man, while he kept the gold himself. 
On the way back these young men remained at their respective houses, 
while the lad continued his journey to the place where he had left his father. 
He found the latter all safe, so they continued their journey to the lodge 
where his mother lived. They found her starving, therefore the lad bought 
great quantities of food with his gold. He also erected a magnificent house, 
in which they took up their abode. 
 

----

Myras ano Taces rrom Nicora Varrey ano Fraser River: 
I. — COYOTE TALES. 
1. The Coyote? 
The Coyote was the most powerful in magic, the cleverest, the most 
cunning, and the wisest of all the ancients. Yet he sometimes made mistakes, 
and was often selfish, boastful, revengeful, foolish, and licentious. He was 
the greatest of all transformers, and did many good and beneficial works. He was sent into the world by the Old-one to put it right, and was specially 
active in the Niak-a’pamuy, Shuswap, and Okanagon countries. He did not 
travel, or do any work, in the Coast region, where the Qwa’qtqwat. and others 
performed, although he went down there two or three times to bring up 
salmon. It seems he had nothing to do with transformations along the coast, 
and never interfered with the Transformers there. Neither would he let the 
Transformers of the coast interfere with, or travel through, his sphere of work. 
He did most of his feats when of middle age, and he lived a long time on 
earth. It is said he travelled very far toward the south and east, and some 
say he reached the borders of the earth. He is said to have been a man 
of very light complexion, tall, and lean, and a fluent and persuasive orator. 
In conversation he had a peculiarity of speech, caused by puckering his mouth, 
and mispronouncing certain sounds. At other times he spoke very deeply, 
using his throat a great deal; but he could change his voice any way he liked, and could speak all languages. It is supposed he lived with the Old- 
One before coming to earth, and that, when his time was up, he joined the 
Old-One again. It is thought he lives in the same place as the latter, but 
not in the same house. Others, again, say that he lives in the far north, at 
the edge of the earth, much beyond the most northern of human habitations. 
Here the Old-One prepared a house of transparent ice for him to dwell in, 
and put a log inside which burns forever. The aurora is the light of the Coyote's fire shining through the ice, or its reflection cast up by the ice. 
In this place he awaits the call of the Old-One to join him when he shall   
   ! Caless otherwise noted, the following tales are from Nicola Valley (Teaws'xamus). + Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 20; also Shuswap, p. 622; Uma, p. 205. # The sky, or upper worl, is mesat. . + Some Indians who have heard of expeditions to discover the north pole, not understanding the object properly, think that the whites are merely in search of the Coyote's house, only they do mot like to say 50. This they say, will neve be found, for the Old-One bas made it among impenetrabe ce. 
[205]      
 

----

296 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
return to earth. Some believe, however, the Coyote may be sent into the 
world again ahead of the Old-One, to prepare it for the latter's coming. 
The Coyote can hear when people speak his name. By rolling over, he 
causes a north wind, which makes the weather cold on earth. He is also 
said to cause rain by urinating. 
According to the Nakamtei'nemux Coyote lived for many winters in the 
Nicola Valley, at a place called “Coyote’s Underground Lodge.” He hunted 
elk and deer in the wintertime, and in the early fall he fished for salmon 
(or perhaps other fish) at a place a little above Spences Bridge, where he 
had a weir across the Thompson River, the place being named “Coyote’s 
Weir.” It is located about six miles above Spences Bridge, where there are 
some bars and an island in the river. Coyote had many wives at different times, and at least four sons who 
used to live with him at Nicola. They were known collectively as Tsamo'xe. 
Individually their names were, the eldest, Kwistst'lise; the second, Kwistse- 
mo'xe; the third, Kwistx&"ai; and the youngest, Kwox'xa”e. 
While Coyote was travelling about on earth making transformations, he 
gave names to different parts of the country. He would make a hill here, 
a bench or plain there; a rocky bluff here, a grassy slope there; bushes or 
trees of certain kinds here, and there widen or narrow a river, make shallow 
or deep water, make canyons, falls, and rapids; and so on. These things 
were supposed to be for the good of the people. Most of the place-names 
of cach countty were thus given by Coyote, and are therefore very old. 
Only a few names have been given to places by Indians since that time; and 
these, of course, are modern. He also made or defined many, if not all, of 
the boundaries between tribes. Some of these are not now known exactly. 
He also gave people personal names; and all the old family names are 
supposed to have been given by him, and are therefore very ancient. Some 
personal names are modern, and originated among the Indians in later days. 
Some think Coyote also caused the various tribes to speak different languages. 
2. Nii'kesentem.! 
‘This story is identical with “Nxi‘ksentem” of the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” P. 21, from the beginning to end of the 32d line on p. 26. The only addition is that Coyote, besides the sons made of clay, pitch, and stone, made a fourth one of wood, which became a true man, and was afterward named Nrikesentem. The first son dissolved, the second melted, and the third sank or was downed.   
+ Compare also Shuswap, p. 622, Utmat, p. 205, also Hill Tout, Report of the Cor on the Eh nological Survey of Canads, in Reports of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, 1899, p. 55.    

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 297 
‘The following variant of this legend was obtained from a Nkamtcinrmuy. The references refer to my “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians.” 
(p- 25) When Nii'kesentem was ready to be lowered down by the Spider and his wife, the latter put four stones in the basket, saying, “Throw one of these stones overboard when you reach each of the four obstacles.” She also gave him a present of four articles of clothing, a coat, shirt, leggings, and moccasins of buckskin, and some food to eat on the way, consisting of four bundles of roots which grew plentifully in the upper world. Each bundle was of a different variety.! (p. 23) When Nii'kesentem reached the earth, he ran four times with the slack of the rope, — twice to the cast and twice to the west. He tugged the rope four times} — twice at each quarter; then the Spider pulled the basket up. He cached his present of clothes at Lytton, but carried the roots on his back to Beta'ni. Although he ate of them, they did not decrease in number. He overtook four old women on the trail, — the Ant, Beetle, etc., and learned from them that his wife, Lq0'qena (the teal duck), had been taken by his father. He overtook his other wife, and where he told her to camp, he created a spring which runs at the present day. K (p. 25) When out hunting one day, he was carrying his lunch of roots, as usual, and-he felt them heavy. He thought to himself, “These roots are heavy, and do not decrease when I eat them. What shall I do with them?” Then the Spider's wife called from the sky, saying, “Throw them on the earth to the people.” Nii'kesentem took some roots from the bundle containing tatw'en,* and threw some to the east, saying, “You shall henceforth live on the earth, and grow plentifully in that direction. People will dig you and eat you in great numbers.” Then he threw some to each of the other quarters, addressing the roots in the same fashion. Taking some roots from each of the other bundles, he did the same thing with them. Thus these roots from the sky became plentiful all over the mountains of the earth. Still most of the roots remained in the bundles, so NLikesentem emptied them out in the Bewni valley, saying, “You will become very plentiful here, and this place will become a noted rootdigging resort.” Therefore the Beta'ni valleys are celebrated for the great quantity and variety of roots to be found there. (p+ 26) Raven heard a man talking in Nui'kesentem’s widow's lodge, 50 he returned to his sons and said, “A stranger lives with our deceased brother's wife (ngo'itsten). Let us go and kill him.” Taking their weapons, they repaired to the lodge, where they were surprised to meet Nii'kesentem, who welcomed them, and gave them food to eat. Neikesentem made a woven packingline (snasd'xén) of the deer’s entrails, with pat- terns on it like those of the Uti'mqt. He made a flood to come in the creek, and, before the coyote could cross the log, he was washed away. (p. 27.) When the girls answered that they wished to have some backbone of the humpback salmon, he threw his penis up stream, and, drifting down, it entered the yougest girl. The other girls, being unable to pull it out, tried to cut it with a sharp stone, but to no purpose. Coyote eried across the river, “Cut it with swamp-grass,” * and with this they managed to cat it off short, (p. 28) When Coyote asked the Similkameen girls if they wished any backbone of the humpback salmon, they said to one another, “He addresses us in the Thompson (£4 ema) language.” They answered, “We want the back of the head of the male mountain sheep (komepstens a stlrips). He answered, “Very well, you shall have your wish. Your moccasins will have many holes, and your horses’ feet be much worn by travel, before you will be able to get salmon.” 
      
+ One bundle contained faren-roots (wild potato or Indian potato, a species of Claytonia); another bundle consisted of shamete-roots (sdder-tongue lly). The roots in the other two bundles are uncertain, 2 Some say, eight times. 3 See reference to this plant in Traditions of the Thompson River Todians, p. 22, note 45. 4A variety of swamp-grass with very sharp edges.  

----

208 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
(p. 38.) Coyote staid a long time in the Upper Nicola and Similkameen countries, where he had many adventures. He was married to the Badger's daughter for a time and by her had children, He was also chased by the Bufialo and the Elk, for he had incurred their displeasure by playing tricks on them. (p. 28) When at last he visited Lytton, he was attired in an eagle-feather headdress, buckskin shirt and leggings fringed with dentalia. He carried a quiver ornamented with very long fringes, and a fine Okanagon bow. He pretended not to understand the people, so they got the Short-ailed Mouse, who talked all languages, to speak to him, but without result, They had to converse with him by signs. Before going into the sweat-house to treat the girl, he stripped of all his clothes. They found him on top of the girl, and were going to kill him; but he ran away naked, and laughed at the people from the hillside. They seized his clothes, etc., but the buckskin turned into sagebush-bark ; the dentalia, into alkaligrass; the eagle feathers into excrement; and the bow and arrows, into twigs of tamarack (the larch-tree). Coyote went on naked, and stole a robe from a man who was sweat-bathing. He had many more adventures after this, and did many wonderful things. 
The Teawa’xamux tell the end of this story as part of Coyote’s wanderings. 
It follows the story 14, Coyote in Nicola Valley, recorded on p. 305. 
Reaching Spences Bridge, Coyote turned up the Thompson River, and 
arrived at the place where he had thrown his penis across the river. The 
girl was still sick; and, as Coyote was dressed like a shaman, the people 
asked him to try and cure their daughter. He spoke to them in the Kalis- 
pelm language, and told them they must erect a sweat-house, and put the girl 
inside, as he treated all his patients in sweat-houses. They did as directed, 
and Coyote entered the sweat-house and commenced to sing. Then he had 
connection with the girl, and thus relieved her of the piece of penis. She 
cried out that the shaman was having connection with her; and the people, 
being angry, ran to kill him. He jumped out, and they chased him up over 
the mountain. He soon left them all behind, excepting the Humming-bird, 
who gained on him very fast. Then he threw himself down, and, rolling 
over, caused a fog to intervene between himself and his pursuer. The Hum- 
ming-bird, being unable to find him, turned back.! 
The following versions of this incident were obtained from an old Nrak-a’- 
pamux’o’e from Lytton: — 
It was the warm season, and at each stream Coyote ascended he saw 
some girls bathing. At each of these places he asked them if they wished 
any soxalken. If they answered “Yes,” he sent his penis across the river 
and let the salmon ascend; and if they answered “No,” he became angry 
and made a rock barrier or falls in the stream, so that the salmon could 
not ascend. When he sent his penis across, it wriggled through the water 
like a snake, and entered the youngest woman; and while it proceeded, he 
paid out the other end just as one would let out a rope. When the woman 
was taken sick and the others tried to cut the penis with a stone knife, he 
called across, “Cut it with grass (a variety of swamp-grass with sharp edges)!” 
    
T Compare “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” p. 28; and Hill Tout, Report etc. p. 65.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 299 
While conducting the salmon up a small tributary of Columbia River, he met a family who had a weir across the stream for the purpose of catching 
very small fish (about four inches long) that descended the stream. This family consisted of a man, his wife, and two daughters, the elder of whom had 
lately finished her training, while the younger one had just become pubescent. 
Coyote entered their house, and they offered him these small fish to eat. 
He asked them why they cooked these fish for him when there was plenty of 
large salmon in the creek. They said that was all they had; and they would 
not believe him, that large fish were to be found in the creek. He taok 
them to the bank, and showed them many large salmon just below their weir. 
He made a fishspear, and showed the man how to use it. They caught 
salmon, and cooked and ate them. Coyote said that henceforth salmon would 
ascend the stream every year, and the people would always be able to catch 
plenty at this spot. He asked to have the two daughters for his wives, and their parents readily assented. They both became pregnant, and in a few 
days each gave birth to a child. The younger one bore a male child, and 
the elder a female. As soon as the children were born, they could walk. 
This was the way with all of Coyote’s children. Coyote left there, taking 
with him his daughter and her mother, and camped at a place on Columbia 
River. He had forgotten about the girl he had made sick at Lytton; but 
that night he either remembered about her or dreamed of her, for in the morning he made up his mind to go to see her. He said, *I do not wish 
to be encumbered on the journey with my wife and daughter. I will leave 
them here.” So he threw his wife into the Columbia River and transformed 
her into stone. She may be seen there yet, leaning over on her back, and her knees sticking out of the water. The water pours over her thighs, and 
forms a kind of pool between her legs. He said, “Henceforth this will be a 
great salmon-fishing place, and the people will take their food from between 
my wife's legs” His daughter, who stood watching him as he transformed 
her mother, was changed into a rock on the bank of the river, which may 
also still be seen at this place. 
When Coyote reached Lytton, he was dressed all over with dentalia, 
and the people wondered at his fine rich clothes. They tried to talk to him 
in several languages, but he pretended to talk a different language and not 
to understand them. They sent for Short-Tailed Mouse who had been married 
to men of all tribes and could talk all languages but she could not make 
him understand. Then they had recourse to sign-language. They asked him 
if he was a shaman, and he said “Yes” They told him that they had a 
sick girl; and he made signs to them to erect a sweathouse and put her 
in it, and he would cure her. 
38—JESOP NORTH TACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VIEL

----

300 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
When Coyote had entered the sweat-house and pulled down the door- 
flap, a man who was suspicious crept up and sat down near the entrance. 
Presently Coyote stopped singing, and the door-lap began to move in and 
out. The man lifted it up, and discovered Coyote copulating with the girl. 
He called out to the people, and they ran to capture him. Coyote rushed 
out of the sweat-house and ran away naked. They could not catch him; and 
as they returned, they said, “Well, we have his rich clothes.” They searched 
for them where he had left them at the sweat-house, but found nothing but 
a heap of alkaligrass. 
The rest of this myth is just the same as in “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” No. 2. 
3. Coyote and the Cannibal Owl! 
1 got this story exactly in the same form as that in the “Traditions of the Thompson River 
Indians,” p. 30, excepting that there is no mention of dogs, and that, after the vomiting contest, Coyote transforms the cannibal into an owl. 
4 The Dogs of Coyote and Cannibal.* 
  This story is the same as that in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” p. 31. When the Coyote saw the cannibal approaching, leading his large and powerful dog, he defecated and changed his excrement into a dog with arrowheads for hair, spear-points for ears, and a large double-edged knife for a tail. 
5. Coyate's Daughters and their Dogs. 
This story is the same as that in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” pp. 34-36, 
excepting that the dogs belonged to the women and were four in number, — the Grisly Bear, the 
Panther, the Wolf, and the Rattlesnake. The cannibal women into whose hands the women fell 
were four in number, — the Louse, the Flea, the Black Fly, and the Mosquito. 
6. Lyn 
This story is told the same in all details as that given in the “Traditions of the Thompson 
River Indians,” No. 7, pp. 36-40. : or, the Sisters who married Coyote and Lynx. 
  7. Coyote and his Daughter. 
This story is told the same as the Shuswap one of the “Coyote and his Niece,” (p. 639) 
with the exception of the following variation, in which a horse is substituted for the canoe: — 
When the Coyote was pretending 10 die, he told his daughter that a stranger would come 
  
+ Compare Shuswap p. 632, Hill-Tout, Osnnes of the Niakya'pamux, Folk Lore, pp. 206, 207. 2 Compare Hill Tout, Osnanes of the Niakya'pamus, pp. 214, 215. 3 Compare Hill-Tout, The Elk-Maiden, pp. 38-44; also Shuswap; aad Uma, p. 313.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 301 
to her uncle's house, riding on a white horse. He would be a rich and good man, and she must marry him. After the Coyote had connection with his daughter, he left the house, and after day- light was seen walking along the opposite bank of the river. He called out, “If it is a male child, rear it; if a female child, kill i 
  8. Coyote and his Guests.! 
‘This story is similar to that in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” p. 4o. ‘The guests were the Black Bear, the Kingfisher, and the Magpie. 
9. Coyote and the Introduction of Salmon. 
Formerly there were no salmon in the interior, because they were prevented from ascending by dams which the people of the coast had erected near the 
mouths of Columbia and Fraser Rivers. The Indians of the interior lived 
principally on meat, while those of the coast had all the salmon. The Coyote 
intended to remedy this, for he knew the salmon were kept prisoners by the 
coast people. He thought the people of the interior should have salmon too. 
The dam across the mouth of Fraser River was owned by four witch women. 
When Coyote had finished travelling through the Shuswap country, he descended 
Fraser River to the canyon, and there changing himself into a piece of wood, 
he floated down the stream until stopped by the fish-dam. 
From here the story is exactly the same as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” 
p. 27, from the 6th line to the end of the 36th. Coyote first led the salmon up to the head waters of the Fraser River, and then up all the tributary streams. He travelled along the river- 
banks, and they followed him. On his way up the Thompson River, about four miles above 
Spences Bridge, he sat down to have a rest, and saw four women bathing on the opposite side of 
the river. The story continues as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” from line 7 from the foot of p. 27 to the end of line 4 from the top of p. 28 in the full version. 
Coyote continued his journey, and led the salmon to the head waters of 
the North Thompson River, then, returning to Kamloops Lake, he conducted them up the South Thompson to Shuswap Lake. From the latter place he 
went south through the Spallumcheen and Okanagon to take the salmon up Columbia River. Four women had a dam across the latter stream, near its 
mouth, and all the coast people caught salmon at this place. Coyote changed 
himself into a piece of wood, as he had done at the mouth of Fraser River, 
and floated down against the dam. The women noticed the piece of wood 
next morning, and picked it up, saying it would make a fine dish. They fashioned it into a dish to eat salmon out of, but soon found there was some 
magic about it, for hardly had they put a salmon on the dish, before it would   
1 Compare Hill-Tout, p. 80; Shuswap, p. 627; Uis'mqt, p. 206. ® Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 27, 28, also Shuswap, Uttmat, p. 206, and Hill Tout, pp. 63-65. 3 Compare Hill-Tout, The Oannes of the Niakya'pamux, pp. 207, 208. 4 Some say at a canyon on Lower Okanagon River, 
 

----

302 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
disappear. They thought the dish uncanny, and threw it into the fire. There- 
upon Coyote changed himself into a baby, and cried from the middle of the 
fire. The women were all unmarried, and, desiring a baby very much, they 
snatched him out of the fire. They reared him, and he grew rapidly. Within 
four days he could walk, in four days more he could speak, and likewise in 
a short time he became half grown. In the house were four baskets, with 
lids, made of cottonwood-bark, which the women told Coyote not to open. 
One day the women were out gathering firewood, and, when they came home, Coyote was crying. They asked him why he cried, and he answered, “I am 
always cold at nights. I should be warm if you would take me to sleep with 
you” That night they took him to bed with them. Next morning when the Women went to bathe, they discovered some loose hair on their thighs, and 
wondered how it could have got there. They said it looked like Coyote's 
hair, but they thought it impossible that Coyote could have been in bed with them. That night, before going to bed, they all put pitch on their thighs. 
Again Coyote had connection with them, and the following ‘morning, when 
they went to wash, they discovered very much of Coyote’s hair sticking to the pitch. They said, “Our enemy, Coyote, must be around; but how could 
he be in bed with us without our knowing it” Now the women went out 
to gather firewood, and when they had got out of sight, Coyote opened the 
lids of the four baskets. A cloud of blow-flics issued from the first, sand flies 
from the second, horse-flies from the third, and wasps from the fourth. Then 
Coyote broke the dam, and let the salmon ascend the river. He said, 
“Henceforth there shall be no dam here, and the salmon will always ascend 
the river at this time of year without obstruction. They shall always be 
accompanied by blow-flies, sand-flies, horse-flies, and wasps, all of which shall 
appear, and continue to be numerous, during the salmon season”! Now 
Coyote kept in advance of the salmon, and conducted them up the river and 
its tributaries. He had as his companion the Seal, who was a native of the 
coast. When he was yet some way below the falls of Columbia River, he 
pushed the Seal into the water, and transformed him, saying, “Henceforth 
you will be a common seal, and sometimes will come as far as this place.” * 
At the Falls of Columbia, Coyote remained a considerable time. Here he 
married the daughter of the Elk? who bore him a daughter. The latter 
grew very fast, like all the ancients, and soon became pubescent. About 
that time the mother found out that her husband was really Coyote, and 
made up her mind to leave him. Coyote knew this, and, taking his daughter, 
    
' The preceding is almost a repetition of the incident at the mouth of Fraser River. See first part of story. * Compare Hill-Tout, Osnnes of the Niskys'pumus, p. 215. 3 Compare Uti'mgt, where Coyote marries Elk woman, and travels with her to Nicola, feeding himself from ber hip every night. At last he fakes 100 big a bite, aod she leaves him (p. 208). 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 303 
threw her into the middle of the river, transforming her into stone.! He said, 
“Henceforth this place will be called Nsupel} and salmon will be caught 
here in great numbers” Coyote's daughter may still be scen just as she fell 
into the river. She sits there, half reclining, with legs outspread and knees 
above water. The water runs over her thighs. With a freshet, her head 
only can be seen. Below this place the river is very still, and salmon con- 
gregate here in large numbers. Now Coyote conducted the salmon up to the 
head waters of the Columbia, making many fishing-places on the way. He 
found many places where the river was so obstructed that the salmon could 
not ascend.” These barriers he kicked down, leaving only canyons in their place. 
When ascending Similkameen River, he found a barrier on that stream. 
Here he saw four girls bathing across the river, and called to them, asking 
if they desired any back of the humpback salmon. They said to onc another, “He addresses us in the Niak-a'pamus language. What does he ask us?” Four times he asked them, and at last one of them answered, “No: we desire the back of the head of the mountain sheep.” If she had answered, 
“Yes” he would have thrown his penis into the girl, as he had done on the Thompson River. Coyote was angry, and said, “Very well! you shall have 
your wish. I will not remove this barrier, and you will have to wear out 
your moccasins travelling to Thompson or Okanagon River before you get 
salmon to eat” This is the reason why salmon cannot be got in Similka- 
meen; and why mountain sheep are very numerous in that country. The 
Similkameen people had to go to Okanagon River, Columbia River, and Thompson and Fraser Rivers to get salmon? Afterwards Coyote travelled into Montana and Idaho, and all through the Kootenai country, where he performed many wonderful feats. Returning, he took up his abode in the Kalispelm country, where he lived several years. He tried to get a wife there, but did not succeed. 
The following variants were obtained from an old Niak-apamux'o’e of Lytton: — 
Long ago all the tribes throughout the interior had no salmon in their respective countries. Only the Coast people had salmon. They kept them for themselves by means of dams or weirs across the streams. Coyote broke the dams of these people on the Columbia and Fraser Rivers, and conducted the salmon up all the larger streams of the interior. He ordained that hence- forth salmon should ascend into the interior cach year; and the broken dams he transformed into rocks, which at the present day form canyons on the Fraser and Columbia Rivers.   
+ Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 28. 3 The name is said to be derived from the fact of the water passing over her thight. 3 See Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 28.

----

304 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
The four boxes of the women who owned the dam across Fraser River 
contained flies, wasps, smoke, and wind. The wind blew the smoke, fies, 
and wasps up after the salmon and Coyote. This is the reason why flies, 
wasps, and smoke appear during the salmon season, and why the winds at that season always blow up-river. 
Some people say the locality where the great dam preventing salmon 
from coming up, which was broken by Coyote, was not near the mouth of 
Fraser River, but in the Canyon at Hell's Gate (between North Bend and 
Spuzzum). Others place it a little above Yale. 
10. Coyote and Buffalo. 
In the Kalispelm country he also did many remarkable things. He ran 
a race around a hill with the Buffalo, who was a cannibal. The winner was 
to eat the loser. If Buffalo won, he would continue to kill and eat men; 
but, if Coyote won, then men would eat buffalo. The latter was very swift 
of foot, and could easily outrun Coyote, who got the best of the race by 
running through the hill, and thus always keeping ahead. They ran around 
the hill four times; and Coyote, reaching the goal first, transformed the Buffalo, 
saying, “Henceforth you will be a common buffalo, and men will hunt you, 
and eat your flesh.” 
11. Coyote and the Cannibal Elk. 
At one place in the Kalispelm country a huge cannibal Elk stood in the 
middle of a stream, and swallowed cvery thing that came down! Coyote 
changed himself into a piece of wood, and, floating down, was swallowed by 
the Elk. Changing to a man again, he made a fire of the piece of wood, 
and, cutting out the EIK's heart, cooked and ate it. Then the Elk staggered 
ashore and died. Coyote transformed the body into a common elk, saying, 
“Henceforth you will be a common elk, and will browse on trees and grass 
instead of eating everything. People will hunt you, and eat your flesh.” 
12. Coyote and the Tobaceo-Tree. 
Coyote also transformed the Tobacco-tree, that killed men! Whoever 
went under its shade, or plucked its leaves, died. Having made a stone pipe, 
he went up into the shade of the tree, and, plucking some of the leaves, put   
+ Compare Shuswap (Eetsa).

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 305 
them in his pipe, and smoked them. He said, “Henceforth you will be ordinary tobacco, and people will pluck and smoke your leaves without harm.” 
13. Coyote and Goatsucker. 
Now Coyote went to the Nicola country. Goatsucker had been accom- 
panying him on his travels for a long time, camping with him at nights, and 
flying over his head by day. When they reached Sulu’s} the Goatsucker 
asked to be transformed, so that he might come north when it was warm 
weather, and Coyote gave him his desire, and said, “You will be the goat- 
sucker, and lay your eggs in the sand. You will be the latest of all the 
birds to arrive.” 
14. Coyote in Nicola Valley. 
Arriving at Lower Nicola? Coyote saw a number of men going up a 
Bluff on the south side of the river to hunt, and transformed them into 
pinnacles of clay and rock! Lower down Nicola River he saw some people 
moving camp, and transformed them with their packs into pieces of clay 
and stones. ¢ 
15. Coyote is Thirsty. 
(Wkamtei nsmuz.) B 
Coyote was walking along a trail on the side-hills above a river. The weather was very hot; and there was no shade, nor were there trees, the slopes consisting of sand, clay, small rocks, and sagebrush. He felt very thirsty, and went down to the river to drink. He ascended to the trail again, 
but soon got thirsty. Again he descended to the river and drank. He said, 
“It is too hot. If I climb back to the trail again, I shall soon get thirsty. 
1 better walk along the river” The walking was rough along the banks of 
the river, there being many bowlders; and there were no trees there, either, 
to shade him. He drank often, but said, “The water does not do me any 
good. 1 cannot keep cool, and am always dry. It is too far to go to drink. 
T will walk in the river.” Still he was not cool enough, and said, “I am too 
hot yet, and'I have to bend too far to drink. I will walk where it is deeper.” 
He walked out until he could lap the water without bending; then the current 
caught him at a point in the stream, and carried him away. He could not 
get out; and to keep afloat, he changed himself into an old log, and in this   
  1 A place ia the Nicola Valley sbout forty miles from Spences Bridge. 2 The place of transformation is opposite tn’, a little shove Lower Nicola postofice. 3 Compare Hill Tout, Oxanes of the Niakys'pamux, p. 213.

----

306 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
form was carried to another country, where he was stranded among bushes 
and grass. There were many rabbits, and some of them came for shelter 
under the sides of the log. They said, “Here is a nice log to hide under.” When many of them were underneath, he rolled over and killed them. Then he assumed his natural form, made a fire, and cooked and ate the rabbits, for he was very hungry. 
15a. Coyote is Thirsty. 
(Nkamtci nemuz and Teawd xamuz.) 
Coyote was travelling in very hot weather, and where there was no shade. Feeling very hot and thirsty, he called on the clouds to shade him. Not 
satisfied with them, he called én the rain. Not satisfied with the rain he 
called on a creek to flow, and then on a river, which carried him off his 
feet, and took him to a distant country. 
16. Coyote and “swa‘won. 
Coyote was travelling over the country, and came near to old man 
“swa’won’s house? His clothes were so torn that he was almost naked, and 
he had no ornaments. Knowing that ‘swa’won had a very fine robe of 
feathers, he thought he would try and gain possession of it. Plucking some 
alcali grass (pesénutten®), he cut the stems in small pieces and transformed 
them into dentalia. Gathering a lot of roseberrics, he changed them to beads, 
and then going to a mogmdgaselp® bush, he plucked the leaves therefrom, 
and, placing them in water with mud and stones, he stirred them up, and 
they became shells (szag).® Now he threaded all on a long string, and went 
to swa‘won's house, wearing them on his body. The old man admired 
Coyotes ornaments very much, and declared he had never seen such beautiful 
necklaces. Coyote said to him, “If you give me your feather robe, I will 
give you all my ornaments.” ‘swa'won agreed, and they exchanged, Coyote 
keeping only a very few real dentalia, which he had in his hair. Before 
Coyote had gone very far, he wished to see the feathers of his robe fly, in 
order to admire them. As it was very calm, he asked the Wind to blow, 
and it blew gently. This did not satisfy him, so he asked for more wind, 
and a breeze came. Now Coyote admired himself very much, but he thought   
11a still another version he asks for more and more rain, until the country is flooded and the torrent carries him away. 2 Sswa'won, or sEwd'won, a small bird, I think the catbird of the whites. 3 A tal grass also called wheat grass” by the whites. 1 ave not been able to get the English name of this bush. © Stag, a large white shell, of somewhat the same form as the deatalium. Formerly largely used by the Indians for omaments, necklaces, and embroidery.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 307 
he would look still finer if there were more wind: so he asked again, and a 
strong breeze blew. Still he was not satisfied, and said, *I want more wind.” 
Then a whirlwind came and seized him, turning him round and round, and 
over and over. It carried him up to the top of a mountain, where it threw 
him repeatedly on the ground, and rolled him ever nearer to the edge of a high cliff. Now Coyote cried for help, and, seeing no one near, he addressed 
the Horse-Tail (z&/xen) which grew at the edge of the precipice, saying, “Oh, 
help me, Horse-Tail! I will pay you dentalia.” The Horse-Tail stopped the wind, and Coyote paid him the dentalia which he had in his hair. The 
Horse-Tail stuck them on his body at regular distances, and this is why it 
is white at every joint now. The whirlwind took away the feather robe, and 
Coyote saw it no more. Meanwhile swa’won went to bed highly pleased with the bargain he had made. On the next morning when he woke up, the 
dentalia had changed back to alcaligrass, the shells to mogmo'gaselpleaves, 
and the beads to roseberries.    
17. Coyote and Deer; and the cyejuggling. 
Deer and his people lived in a large house on the top of a high, steep, 
smooth, rocky bluff. They clad in the paunches of deer, and their blankets 
consisted of the same material. They had four dogs which always remained 
near the house, and gave tongue when any one approached. They were 
Wolf, Panther, Grisly Bear, and Rattlesnake? Deer's wife was Coyote’s 
daughter, and she wished to visit her father, and show him her lately born 
baby. She was clad in a kilt and robe of deer-paunches and the baby was 
wrapped in a blanket of the same material. She carried it on a board carrier 
which had a headpiece and cover of deers paunch. When she arrived at the house of her father, the latter acted as if foolish, and snapped at her 
clothes. One day when she was not looking, he ate up the baby's blanket. 
She scolded him, and said, “How can you eat such a dirty thing! Don’t 
you know a baby's blanket is always saturated with urine?” She had to 
watch him constantly, for as soon as she turned her back, he would bite off 
a piece of her clothes. At last she decided to leave, for both she and her 
baby were almost naked. Coyote wished to go with her, and she fried to 
dissuade him; but he persisted. 
When they reached the foot of the cliff on which Deer's house was built, 
she told her father to take hold of her belt, and shut his eyes. When he 
had done this, she jumped up like a deer; but Coyote opened his eyes, and 
  
I Compare the latter part with the Utimqt story p. 212; also Shuswap, Vol. IL of this series, p. 632; A. L. Kroeber, Cheyenne Tales (Journal of American Folk-Lore, XIII, p. 168). * Compare other stories where the same dogs figure, for instance p. 250; P. 300, No. 5; also 239, 266; and p. 212. 
39—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vil.

----

308 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
they came down again. Again she jumped, with the same result. The fourth 
time, Coyote kept his eyes shut throughout, and they reached the summit in 
four jumps. Now Deer's dogs ran up and fawned about the woman, wel- 
coming her; but when they saw Coyote, they attacked him fiercely, and the 
people had to catch them and tie them up. Deer made his father-in-law 
welcome, and placed food before him, but, instead of eating it, he turned 
round and bit a picce off his sondnlaw’s robe. Now the people had to 
watch Coyote, and were much annoyed by him, for he constantly ate up their 
clothes and blankets. At last they agreed to desert him, and one night while 
he slept, they all left the house, taking their belongings with them. Then 
Deer made a thick wall of ice to cover the house, so that Coyote should die. 
When the latter awoke, he found himself imprisoned, and, seeing no way of 
escape, began to lick the ice with his tongue. He licked until his tongue 
wore out, then, taking off one of his arms, he put it on his mouth for a 
tongue. When it was worn out, he took the other arm, then his legs, and 
at last his penis. When the latter was almost worn out, he managed to get 
a very small hole through the ice. Now he took his flesh and other parts 
of his body and passed them out in small pieces through the hole. Then he took 
his eyes, and pushed them out; but immediately the crows and other birds 
commenced to caw and make a noise. At once he drew them in again. 
Twice more he tried, but with the same result. Now he said to himself, 
“There is no other way to do. I must take chances.” On pushing out his 
eyes the fourth time, the Raven seized them and flew off. 
When Coyote had gotten his whole body outside, he put the pieces 
together and became as before, only he had no eyes, and consequently could not see. He went along by feeling, and at last came near a village where 
he heard girls talking. They were saying, “There goes blind Coyote groping among the trees,” He called out, “I am not Coyote, and I am not blind. 
I see the stars. Look at that bright one overhead! Come here and see if 
I do not speak the truth.” One girl, the swa'won,’ said she would go and 
see. The others told her not to go, saying, “He lies. How can he see 
stars in the daytime?” But she went nevertheless, and, when she got near, 
Coyote clutched her head and pulled out her eyes. Crying out, *Zépaler'zp 
#dxa hip?® he threw them up in the air, and they fell into the sockets. 
Now he could sce, although not as well as with his own eyes, and he 
ran away. The people chased him, but could not overtake him. They 
picked two bearberries and put them in ‘swa’won’s head; but she could not 
see as well as before. This is why the ‘swa’won-bird has red eyes at the 
present day. 
Now Coyote went on and came to a lodge where he saw an old half:   
1 Some say the crow. ® A small bied, 1 thiok the cat-bird, see p. 306. 3 These words seem to have no special meaning, *Hip” is the cry of the male blue grouse.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 309 
blind woman? alone. He entered and asked where the other people were, 
and the old woman answered, “My four daughters are away at the village 
seeing the people playing with Coyotes eyes. They have great fun every 
day.” Coyote asked what her daughters did when they came in, where they 
sat, how they behaved, and what she said to them. After getting all the 
information he desired, he took her by the nose and shook her so that all her 
bones fell out, then entering her skin, he sat down in her place. The skin covered him all except the bridge of the nose, where he daubed a little pitch 
to conceal the place. Soon the girls came home, and he said to them, I 
am very poorly tonight. 1 have not been able to gather any wood, or cook 
food for you. I was going to seck wood when I fell over and hurt myself 
See my nose where I skinned it, and had to put on pitch.” The girls laughed, 
and, after gathering firewood, they commenced to cook, and relate to the old 
woman all the incidents of the day's sport, and how much fun there had 
been with Coyote's eyes. Coyote said, “I must go there to-morrow and have 
some fun. I cannot see much, but I can hear the people talk.” The girls 
laughed at the idea, saying, *How can you go there? You are almost crippled, 
and too feeble to walk so far.” Coyote persisted, so they agreed to carry 
him there and back. On the following morning the youngest took him on 
her back, but, after carrying him some distance, he began to groan and say 
the tumpdine was hurting him, because it was too short. She lengthened it 
and carried him again, and then he had connection with her. When she felt 
him acting thus, she was astonished and ashamed, and threw him down. The 
others said, “Why do you throw mother on the ground so rudely?” But she 
never answered a word. Now one of the others carried him, and he did the 
same to her. She also flung him -down and remained silent. The same 
happened with the other two sisters, Coyote having connection with the eldest one just as they reached the playground. Already all the birds were playing 
with the eyes. Now Coyote commenced to dance and sing, saying, “Oh! I have heard much of the fun here. I am old and blind, yet I have come 
here to see the wonderful eyes” The people said, *Let the old woman have 
the eyes in her hands to feel and play with them. She came here for that 
purpose.” They placed the eyes in Coyote’s hands, and he commenced to 
turn them over, and dance with them. He danced backwards and forwards, 
cach time going farther. At last, when some distance from the people, he 
pulled out “swa’won’s eyes, and, tossing up his own, cried, *Zépale isp po'za 
Jip,” and they fell back into the sockets. Now he ran away, and the people 
chased him; but he caused a fog to appear behind him, and thus escaped. 
The people gave up the pursuit, saying, “It is useless. That is Coyote. 
No other could be so wise and tricky.” All four sisters became pregnant, 
and gave birth to children. 
"Some wy the was the blue grome; all ages at she was 3 Bed  

----

310 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
18. Coyote and the Geese.! 
Coyote while passing a lake saw a flock of Geese flying, and called on them to come down. They pretended to be unable to resist his call, and all 
of them alighted on the ground Coyote knocked them down with a stick, 
and, leaving his son to pluck them, climbed up to the top of a tree to strip 
off some bark to make a kettle with. Meanwhile the Geese opened their 
eyes, and the Coyote boy called out, “Father, the Geese have opened their 
eyes.” Coyote answered, “They died with their eyes open.” The boy again 
called, “Father, the Geese move;” and Coyote answered, “That is because 
they have a little life left: they are just dying.” Again the boy called, * Father, 
the Geese are getting up,” and, “Father, the Geese commence to fly.” Now 
Coyote looked, and, seeing the Geese making ready to fly, he hurriedly 
descended the tree, calling to his son to hold them. He seized a stick, 
rushed at the Geese, but, not being able to see on account of the feathers, 
he struck his son instead of the Geese, and broke both his arms. The Geese 
escaped, and all Coyote had left was a few feathers. He bandaged his son's 
arms, and continued his journey. 
Following is a Nkamtcinemuy version of this story: — 
Coyote was the most gifted in magic of all the ancient people. When the geese flew north in the spring, and south in the fall, he would talk to 
them and then clap his hands. When he did this, they would lose their 
power of flight, and would fall to the ground. Immediately upon touching the earth, however, they regained their power of flight; but meanwhile Coyote 
succeeded in clubbing many of them. These he would pluck and eat. The 
feathers or down he sometimes transformed into snow. 
19. Coyote and the Eggs.® 
Coyote and his son had been eating a bear's carcass, and, having overfed 
themselves, fell asleep alongside of it. Some women who were egg-hunting 
came along, and, finding them sound asleep, smeared their mouths and hands 
with bearfat, and took away all the cooked meat they could see. This hap- 
pened at a place in Lower Nicola called Kestami'ns a sniki¢p.¢ When Coyote 
awoke, he missed the meat, and, seeing his son's hands and mouth covered 
with fat, he began to thrash him. The lad said, *It must have been yourself, 
for your mouth is also covered with fat.” 
  
+ Compare with Shuswap, Vol. II of this series, p. 638. 2 Some say swans. 3 Some say he conjured. them. + Some say fll to theground. 3 Compare Shuswap, 1.c., p. 683; also Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, pp. 71, 72: This place, Coyotes Oven, is near where the Lower Nicola schoolhouse now stands.   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 311 
Now Coyote knew that a trick had been played on them, so he followed 
the women's tracks, and found them gathering eggs near the lakeshore. He 
went to a fine camping-place, where he knew they would camp for the night, 
and changed himself into an old stump, and his son into a broken branch on 
the stump, He made ants build a hill round the base of the stump to delude 
the women still more. At evening the women arrived, and made preparations 
to camp, some of them hanging their baskets on the stump. They made an 
earth oven and baked the eggs, saying, “They will be cooked in the morning.” 
They put several hundred eggs in the oven, and had more in the baskets. 
When they were going to bed, an old woman said, “The stump moves:" 
and another said, “That stump was not there before” But the others all 
laughed, and said it had always been there, and asked how it could move. 
When they were all asleep, Coyote and his son ate all the eggs in the 
baskets, and then, opening the oven, ate all that were there also. When they had finished, they stuffed the privates of cach woman with egg-shells. 
Next morning the women got up and, going to urinate, wondered at the noise 
they heard. Those still in bed thought it was made by a Chinook wind 
striking the tops of the mountains, but it really was caused by the urine 
playing on the egg-shells. The women soon noticed that the stump was gone 
and also all their eggs. They said, “That is the dog of a coyote getting 
even with us.” 
20. Coyote and Grisly Bear. 
Coyote was travelling, and, reached the Grisly Bear's house. He thought 
he would enter. Grisly Bear never welcomed him, nor offered him anything 
to eat, and, soon after he had entered, she went out. Coyote watched her 
through a crack, and saw her go to a gulch near by, across which there 
was a pole. He knew that she had gone to defecate. When she returned, 
Coyote left, awent to the same place, and hired the wood-worm to bore a hole 
in the log, near the centre, just large enough to make it break when the 
Grisly Bear's weight came on it. Now Coyote hid near by to watch the 
Grisly the next time she came. She walked out on the pole to defecate, 
and, when it broke, she was precipitated to the bottom of the chasm, and 
killed. Coyote laughed, for he had got his revenge. 
21. Coyote and Grisly Bear? 
Again Coyote was travelling. When he felt hungry, he thought he would visit the Grisly Bear, near whose house he happened to be at that   
1 Compare Shuswap, 1. 2 Compare Traditions ». 630. the Thompson River Tndians, pp. 28, 29, also Shuswap, Le, p. 635.   
 

----

312 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
time. She was eating when he entered, but never offered him anything to 
cat. He became angry, went outside, and created some salmon and fresh 
service berries, which he took to the Grisly-Bear, and said, “I am surprised 
at your continuing to eat old food when there is plenty of fresh food to be 
obtained. Look at these fine salmon and berries! It is summer, and you think it is still winter. How stupid you must be! You had better bring out 
your store of old food, and I will help you to eat it. There is no use 
keeping it. When we have finished it, then we will eat the fish and berries 
1 have brought. We will have a great feast, and to-morrow I will help you 
to catch salmon” The Grisly-Bear believed him, and, with Coyote, ate up 
all her winter provisions. Coyote now left, saying, We are too full to eat 
the food I brought to-night. In the morning we will eat it.” When morning 
came, Grisly-Bear saw nothing but withered leaves and sticks where the fish and berries had been, and, going outside, saw that the ground was covered 
deep with snow and a chilly wind was blowing. Since she had no provisions 
left, she starved to death. 
22. Coyote and Xaxa'.! 
Coyote on his travels came across a Xax&, who was busy roasting the 
meat of two deer he had killed. This man could kill animals simply by 
striking on the ground his magic staff, which was ornamented with fawn’s 
hoofs. Coyote said to him, “Why, surely you are not cooking meat! Chiefs 
never cook meat! Such work is fit only for women, slaves, and the likes 
of me. Let me cook for you” Xaxa, was flattered by what Coyote said, and 
wished to make himself out a great chief, so he threw the spits to Coyote, 
and let him cook. Coyote said, “Great chiefs lic down, and do not work. 
When food is ready, they are called” Xaxa’ lay down and fell asleep. Now 
Coyote ate all the meat, and ran away. Xaxa' woke up, and, finding nothing 
but bones, gave chase to Coyote. When he saw he could not overtake 
Coyote, he set fire to the grass, and blew behind it; but Coyote set counter 
fires, and blew behind them; so his efforts were of no avail. Xaxa went 
back again, roasted the bones, and broke them up for the marrow. Coyote 
changed himself into a Fox, and, coming along, spoke to Xaxa’ in the same 
way he had previously done, and with the same result; the latter going to 
sleep, and Coyote eating all the marrow. Xaxa’ chased him again, but could 
not catch him. 
  
  + Yaqt', mysterious person, person gifted with mystery, magic, superhuman or wonderful powers, a wirard, 
etc. Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indisns, Coyote and Fox, p. 29, also Shuswap, 1. p. 633: A. L. Kroeber, Cheyenne Tales (Journal of American Folk-Lore, XIII, p. 166); also pp. 206, 211 of 
volume.      
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 313 
23. Coyote and Antelope; or, Story of the Copper Ball! 
A long time ago, besides the Badger and family, who lived at Zuxt, 
Coyote was the only inhabitant of the Nicola country. He lived in an under- 
ground house at Tezzela;® and the place is known as the Coyote’s under- 
ground house at the present day. He had two wives, — the Alder woman 
and the Cottonwood woman, — who were created by the Qwo'qtqwar? 
From them he had four sons and four daughters. Afterwards the Antelope 
came to the Nicola country and lived with Coyote. He, also, had four sons 
and four daughters. Before that, he had lived in the south.* Now, at this 
time there lived a number of people at Lytton, who possessed a copper ball 
of which they were very proud. They boasted much of this wonderful ball, 
which they often used in ball games, and it became noted far and wide. 
Coyote and Antelope made up their minds to get possession of the famous 
ball, and despatched their eight sons to take it from the Lytton people. 
From here on this story is the same as “Coyote Legend,” No. 5, p. 32, in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” from line 12 to the end, with the following single addition: — 
Among those who pursued the Antelopes and Coyotes were the Hummingbirds, who were swifter of foot than any others of the Lytton people. They could have easily overtaken the Antelopes, and their friends depended on their getting the ball; but they fooled away their time by playing and running around among the flowers, instead of seriously chasing the Antelopes. When they returned to Lytton without the ball, the people wege angry, and transformed them to the humming- birds we see at the present day. 
  In a Nkamtcinemux version the Meadow-Lark said four times: 
“tcoteu'karo Sskwi trkwi'te.” “nothing but the throat.” Sskwi'tzkwitz is not the ordinary word for “throat,” and I do not know its derivation.® 
After a long residence with Coyote, Antelope at last moved over to 
Montana, where he took up his abode, and his descendants became numerous 
in that country. Therefore antelopes are plentiful there at the present day, 
but are not found in the Thompson country. The children of Antelope and 
Coyote intermarried, and their descendants had different colors of skin and 
hair. Those who had whitish and yellowish skins are said to take after the 
Cottonwood mother, and those who had reddish and brownish skins, after the 
Alder mother. Therefore we find these colors of skin among Indians at the 
  
  + Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 32; also Shuswap, Lc. p. 642. 3 Near Jesus Garcia's ranch, 2 See Qofqiqwal. legend, and compare Shuswap, Lillooet, Uta'mat, p. 218 of this volume. + Some place in the States due south of the Nicola, perhaps eastern Washington or Oregon. & See Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 34, 
    

----

314 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
present day. As Coyote and his two wives each had different colored hair, 
therefore people now have light and dark colored hair of different shades. 
It is said that some of the Indian inhabitants of Nicola are descendants of 
Coyote.! 
24. Coyote and the Monster 
There was once a monster? of great size, who used to kill people, and 
eat their bodies. In form he resembled a man, and had very long hairs 
Coyote came along and drew away his breath, thus killing him. Then he 
cut up his body, and threw the several parts to the neighboring tribes. He 
scalped him, and threw the scalp and hair to the Crees ®: therefore they have 
very long hair, and scalp their enemies. He beheaded him, and threw the 
head to the Lower Fraser tribe: therefore they have large heads. He cut 
off his legs, and threw them to the Kootenais: therefore they are fleet of foot. 
His arms he threw to the Shuswap: therefore they are a powerful people. 
His privates he threw to the Niak-a’pamux'o’e: therefore they are noted for 
their thick penis. His heart he threw to the Okanagon: therefore they are 
a brave and stouthearted people. After he had finished cutting the body 
up, he threw the knife that he had used, covered with blood, to the Upper 
Thompsons : therefore they became known as “Knife People,” and were ccle- 
brated for quarrelling, and stabbing one another. Now he plucked some 
grass, wiped his hands with it, and threw the wiper to the Lillooet: therefore 
they are a poor people, behind all others, Having disposed of the body, 
Coyote said, “As a cannibal of great power and magic has been killed and 
dismembered here, this place will always be ‘mystery,’ and warriors will gain 
knowledge and power by training here.” 
  
+ Some say that the original Nicola Indians were all descended from the coyote, antelope, and badger. # Compare p. 255; also Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 81, also Shuswap, Lc, p. 667 Franz Boas, Chinook Texts, p. 21. 3 Some say a Swater mystery.” 4 Some say he had haic all over. 8 Some say, to the tribes of the cast; others say, 10 some tribe south or est of the Okanagon # Some say, to the tribes of the west, or of the coast.   

----

II. — TRANSFORMER TALES. 
25. The Qwo'qtqwar.! 
The Qwo'qtqwat were transformers who came from the Lower Fraser 
River or from the sea. They were four brothers, the youngest onc of whom 
was gifted with the greatest magic. He was very small, and, when travelling, 
the second eldest brother always carried him on his back. The name of the 
eldest brother was Sesalian. They travelled through many countries, putting 
things to right, and transforming or killing what they saw was bad. It is 
said they performed many wonderful feats in the lower country;® but the 
Upper Niak-a’pamux only know of those feats which they performed while 
passing through the country above Lytton. They came up the canyon of 
the Fraser River until they came to Spences Bridge. When they arrived at 
Mud Slide} they saw the cannibal who lived there fishing in the river. He 
was using a two-pronged spear which had barbs of copper. The Qwo/qtqwar 
covered themselves with birch-bark, and, changing themselves into fishes, swam 
up in front of where the cannibal was standing. The latter speared the 
youngest brother, and landed him; but, whilst he was reaching for his fish- 
club, the fish cut the strings connecting the barbs with the prongs, knocked 
the club out of the cannibal’s hands, and jumped into the water. The cannibal 
was very sorry to lose his valuable spear-points, and went home. Soon 
afterwards the brothers went to his house, and gave him back the spear- 
points, saying they had found them in the body of a dead salmon. The 
cannibal was overjoyed, and told his wife, the Short-tailed Mouse, to make 
some soup for the visitors. She put a single root and a single berry into 
a large kettle, and gave the visitors large spoons. They were astonished to 
find, when the food was placed before them, that the kettle had become 
quite full, and the soup as thick as if many roots and berries had been used. 
They ate until satisfied, but the kettle remained as full as ever. Then the 
cannibal took the kettle, and finished it at one spoon-ful. The cannibal went 
fishing again, and, while they were passing by above him, they kicked down a 
mountain on him; but he jumped across the river on to a cliff, and remained 
unharmed. Since that time this mountain has continued to slide into the river. 
  
+ Compare Utfmqt, p. 218 of this volume aod Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 42. 2 Along Lower Fraser River and Fraser Canyon. 3 A place where there is a sliding mountain, about four miles and a hall below Spences Bridge, on the South side of the Thompson River. See p. 21 of this volame; Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 42. 4 Nga'uz, a kind of soup made of roots and berries. 
[315]   
  
  40—JHSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VIL

----

316 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
When they arrived at Xexuxo'xemex,! the youngest brother felt thirsty, 
and sent the cldest to get some water on a dry hillside. He laughed at 
the request, but, nevertheless went, and was surprised to find a spring from 
which he brought back some water. They said, “Henceforth this spot will 
be a training-place for girls.” 
When they arrived just below Ca‘nexenenamay Mountain they camped 
on the river. Here the brothers had a dispute and tried one another's magic; the three elder against the youngest who caused the river to rise, so that his 
elder brothers were in danger of drowning and had to create a high rocky 
mountain ® on which to escape. The flood followed them to the top, and 
they would have been drowned, had they not prayed their brother to desist. 
The water ran off; but the mountain still remains. When the Quo'qtqwar reached Nkamtcin,! they turned up the Nicola 
River, and travelled until they came to a place near Kwenca'rten® Here 
they met Coyote, who was sitting on a stone watching them as they approached. 
They tried to transform him, but were able only to change his tracks into 
stone. Therefore the marks of the coyote’s feet may be seen on this stone 
at the present day. Coyote sat with his chin resting on his hand, and stared 
at them while they were trying to metamorphose him. When they had failed, he cried out to them, “You are making the world right: so am I. Why try 
to punish me when I have done you no harm? This is my country. Why 
do you come here and interfere with my work? If I wished, 1 could turn 
you into stone; but as you have likely been sent into the world, like myself, 
to do good, I will allow you to pass, but you must leave this country as 
quickly as you can. We should be friends, but must not interfere with each 
other's work.” The Qwo'qtqwar went on until they came to the place called Coyote’s 
House, near Tezzela’ Here they found Coyote living in an underground 
house, and using a branch with a knot-hole in it for a wife. They burned 
the branch, and made two wives for him, — one from the aldertree, and 
the other from the cotton-wood. When Coyote returned home in the evening 
and found his branch wife dead, he wept; but when the Qwoqtqwa. presented 
him with real wives, he became very glad. 
Now the brothers came to Ziixt! above which place there was at that   
Lie pubescent girl place.” This is about two miles, or two miles and a half, below Speaces Bridge, on the south side of the river. There is a spring there, where pubescent girls from all the neighboring camps used to wash themselves. ; 3 Rocky Mountain, a mile snd a half below Spences Bridge, on the north side of the river. It Is 5,500 feet shove sealevel. See p. 221 of this volume, 3 The mountai referred to above, note 2. 4 The mouth of Nicola River, a mile and a quarter shove Spences Bridge. 3 About twenty-two miles from Spences Bridge (near Alex. Gordon's ranch). © Sifstetans a mi'kitp underground house of Coyote. + Tema or Texae'l, near Jesus Garcia's ranch. See p. 313, ahio p. 222. # The foot of Nicola Lake.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 317 
time no lake, only a creek. Here, on the mountain called Sqomallst,' lived 
the cannibal of that name in a house of stone. All around were scattered 
the bones of the people whom he had devoured. The youngest brother 
entered the cannibal's cave, the entrance of which immediately shut behind 
him. The cannibal seized him, pushed him into a copper kettle and put him 
on the fire to boil, and then, going to his couch, lay down to have a nap 
while the meal was cooking. The transformer made a hole in the bottom of 
the kettle, which began to leak so badly, that the fire went out. Then he 
transformed the cannibal into the “mystery” * of that place and made a dam 
across the creek at Zixt. The waters rose and formed a lake,® which covered 
the cannibal’s house. Now the transformers jumped over the bones of the 
people, whom the cannibal had killed and they came to life again. These 
people settled at Zuxt, which was then a desert place, and became quite 
numerous. Afterwards they were attacked by the Fish people from the coast, 
or Lower Fraser; but they drove the invaders back with great slaughter. 
The Qwo'qtqwar swerved to the south from Ziixt, and travelled down 
the Similkameen River to the Forks. Here, at Zu'tsamen,* they again met 
Coyote, who objected to their invasion of the country, and threatened to 
destroy them. They decided to leave the interior: so they travelled up the 
Tulameen River, and crossed the Cascade Range to the Lower Fraser River. 
Henceforth they confined their operations to the coast, and it is said they 
travelled all around the edges of the world. Having finished their work, 
they went to the sky, where they chose to be transformed to stars. The 
youngest brother said he wished to be big and easily seen: so he became 
the evening star. 
The story of Qwo'qtqwas, and Coyote’s wife * is told in the same way as Hill Tout's “Oannes of the Niakya'pamux,” pp. 205, 206, only the man is recognized as having been a coyote. He was an old man. They used four strings for pulling out the child, — the first of Awo'es-bark, the second of sinew, the third of bird-cherry-bark, and the last of hair made from the withers of animals (some say of the bear). 
According to a version obtained from an old man belonging to the Lytton band, the Qwa'qt- quar, originated some distance to the west, either in the Lower Fraser country or the Lower Lillooet country. They ascended the Fraser River, and entered the country of the Canyon Indians at Spuzzum. They followed the Fraser River up to Lytton, Lillooet, and beyond. Some say they did not travel through the Thompson River district, while others claim they did. They were four Black-Bear brothers who began to travel over the country after killing the four Grisly-Bear cubs. Here follows a story exactly the same as No. 22, “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians.” 
    
+ “Moustain Stone,” a siccp mosatain on the north side of Nicola Lake, generally called by the whites Gilmore's Mountain. +A sprit which works harm, and is feared by the Indians. + Now Nicola Lake. 4 Red paint" Vermilion Buf, near the Forks of Sialkarmeen. 4 Sec p. 222 of this volume; compare also Shuswap, p. 652; also known to the Lillooet. This story is generally included in that of Quo'qiqwat, of which it is supposed to form » part. 
 

----

318 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
While they were escaping, and followed by the bereaved Grisly-Bear 
mother, they met Chipmunk, whom they asked to delay the pursuing Bear. 
When Grisly-Bear appeared, Chipmunk called her names and mocked her. 
She would get angry and rush at Chipmunk, who escaped by running under 
a log. The fourth time she ran after him she almost caught him, her claws 
scratching his back. Therefore the chipmunk has stripes at the present day, 
the result of these scratches.) Later they met Marmot, whom they asked to 
detain Grisly-Bear. He did this in the same way as Chipmunk. On the 
fourth rush he was scratched by Grisly-Bear just as he went under a stone. 
This is the origin of the color-markings of the common marmot of the 
present day. 
After carrying the four Black Bears across the water, and leaving them in the care of his wife, Kwone'qwa. prepared to carry Grisly-Bear across, and had just finished making a hole in his canoe of the exact size of her privates, when she appeared. He made her sit on this hole to keep out the water. ‘The smallest fish bit her first, and 50 on up to the largest, which was the sturgeon. When he bit her, she died. Kwone'qwa threw her body into the river, and ordained that hence- orth Grisly-Bears should never chase people except just once in a long while.* 
The brothers, on the way up the Fraser, came to Yale, where, on the 
opposite side of the river, they saw a man trying to catch salmon with a 
sharpened pole. He had a wife and two children. They went to him, and 
found that he pulled the pole out of the water after it had rubbed against 
a salmon, and, drawing his finger over it, he scraped off the fish-slime which 
was on it. This he ate, and he gave some to his family. They told him 
this was bad, and showed him how to make a dip-net and catch salmon, also 
the methods of cooking and drying fish. They said, “If you cat fish raw, it 
is the same as poison in your stomach, and will make you sick.” At one 
place® they came to the house of a Coyote who was about to cut open his 
wife and take the child from her. He told them he had done this with all his wives, who, of course, died under the operation; but the children always 
lived, and could run as soon as they saw the light They told him there 
was no need of killing women in this way. They got some bird-cherry bark, and, making a string, attached it to the infant and pulled. The child had 
come partly out, when the string broke, and it went in again. Then they 
got some sinew from the neck of a deer, which never stretches. Making a string, they attached it to the child and pulled it out. They said, “Hence- 
forth women shall give birth to children, and not have to be cut open. We 
made a slight mistake by using cherry-bark, therefore once in a while women 
will have trouble in giving birth.” Had they used sinew at first, women would 
  
1 See No. 15, “Traditions of the Thompson River lodians.” 2 Compare p. 220 of this volume, where the grandfather of the cubs is called Sqon¥qa. 3 Some say in the couniry between Spuszum and Lytion, others say at Thompson Siding. 4 Compace p. 222 of this volume.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 319 
never have trouble in childbirth at the present day. Then they asked the 
mother how she wanted the child, and she answered, “I want it to be a baby 
for a day, so that I can fondle it; next day let it walk.” They said, “All right! 
Henceforth children shall be babies for a day, and the next day they will walk.” 
A day to them, however, meant a year; and thercfore children nowadays 
cannot walk before a year. Had the women said, “Let it walk at once,” children would now move about shortly after birth, the same as horses or 
other animals. The brothers met Kokwelaht'it at Lytton, and they recognized 
one another as friends. Thence they travelled together to the ends of the 
earth. When they reached the edge of the earth, they said, “We will go 
to the ‘chief above.” One of them said, “He won't be pleased if we go to him alive. We better stay here at the edge of the world.” Then each turned 
his head around to the side; and when he looked back again, a house stood 
there, ready for his reception. Kokwe'la did the same. Again they did this, 
and food appeared; again, and water appeared. One said, “We have no 
wives nor children” Then the youngest brother pulled the lower rib out of 
his left side, and, blowing on it, it became a woman. Each of them did the 
same. Then the first woman said, “We will enter the houses and cat.” The 
youngest brother said, “We will have connection first.” Then they all had 
connection, cach one with his wife, one couple after another. The women 
just had time to enter their houses, when they gave birth to children. Each 
one told her child, “Call your father to eat.” The fathers went, and cach 
met his child at the door. They said, “Henceforth we will live in these 
houses, and will travel no more. No one shall ever be able to find us” 
These five are supposed to be there yet, and no one knows the direction 
they live in.   
26. Kokwe'la, or Kokwelah&it.! 
“This story is told in the same way as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” 
iii, pp. 45, 46. Compare also Uti'mqt, p. 224, and Hill-Tout, pp. 68-70. 
The following legend regarding Kokwe'la was told by a Nkamtci'ngmuy. 
Kokwe'la was the offspring from the union of a maiden with the hog-fennel- 
root. He became a man of large stature, great physical strength, and supreme 
magic. When a boy, he quarrelled with some of his companions, and thrashed 
them. Their parents were angry, and drove him off, saying, “The hog-fennel- 
root is your father, and yet you are not ashamed, but associate with people, 
and even thrash their children. A bastard ought to be ashamed to mix with 
other people.” He went home and asked his mother, who told him that the hog-fennel-root was indeed his father, whereupon he left the place, and com- 
menced to train himself in the mountains. Afterwards he travelled as a   
1 The Thompson name of the hog-feancl. Kokwelah¥it (or kokwelahit] means child of Kokwe'la.”

----

320 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
transformer? over the earth, most of the time alone, but sometimes in 
company with the Qwo'qtqwar brothers. One time they camped together at 
a place on Thompson River a little above Lytton, where there is now a 
fairsized spring. They were all very thirsty, and competed with one another 
to see who could cause water to come. When all four brothers had failed, 
Kokwe'la kicked the ground, and caused the spring which is there to appear. 
When thirsty while travelling, he just kicked the ground, and water would 
gush forth. He left many springs in the track he travelled? 
27-36. Old-One. 
27. Creation of the World by the Old-One. 
Formerly the earth we live on did not exist, in its place was a great lake. 
Old-One, who lives in the upper world or in that part of it where now the 
highest snow-capped mountains reach the sky, got tired looking below him 
at the endless waste of water. He thought, “I will make an island in the 
middle of the lake, which will be nice to look at.” Taking some clear * earth 
(soil of the upper world), he formed it into a'round ball, hollow in the centre, 
and threw it down into the middle of the lake. Here it formed a large 
island, — the carth upon which we live. The ball burst when it hit the water,’ 
and, spreading immensely on all sides, it covered a large area, in the same 
way that a landslide may not be very large when it first shoots out; but as 
it runs it increases in size, spreading out eventually over a large surface. 
The earth remained in the water as a broken mass of flats, hollows, hills, 
and islets, much as we see it now. 
As the world was still a bare mass of earth, not very pleasing to look 
at, Old-One came down himself afterwards, and commenced to improve it, 
making trees, grass, and other needful things to grow. This is the reason 
that the edge of the earth is surrounded by great lakes at the present day. 
28. Old-One and the End of the World® 
The earth is 3 round” ball that revolves on a stick that is its axis. It 
is just like an Indian top? The lower end of the stick rests in another world 
where Old-One lives. He sits close by and watches it. At his right hand   
+ Some say he was sent by the OldMan to work as 4 transformer. 2 Some say most of the water-springs in the Thompson River country were created by him. 3 Compare with Nicola story of Kokenaleks in this collection, where Batheboy kicks a ball up ia the sky, which, falling down on a lake, becomes the earth. 4 Some say transparent or semi-transparent. 5 Some maintain that it id not burst, but floats on the lake to the present day. # See A. L. Krocher, Cheyenne, Tales, Journal of American Folk-Lore, XIIL, p. 164. + Some say round, but flat. 8 Or like a spindle. 
   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 321 
sits the Beaver) When Old-One thinks it is time for the earth to stop 
turning round, he will tell the Beaver to gnaw the pole, and the earth will 
fall over and stop revolving.* 
29. Old-One and the Earth, Sun, and People. 
A long time ago, before the world was formed, there lived a number of people together. They were the Stars, Moon, Sun, and Earth. The latter 
was a woman? and her husband was the Sun The Earth-woman always found fault with her husband, and was disagreeable with him, saying he was 
nasty, ugly, and too hot! They had several children. At last the Sun felt 
annoyed at her grumbling, and deserted her. The Moon and Stars, who 
were relatives of the Sun, also left her, and moved over to where the Sun had taken up his abode. When the Earth-woman saw that her husband and 
his friends had all deserted her, she became very sorrowful, and wept much. 
Now Old-One appeared, and transformed Sun, Moon, and Stars into those we 
see in the sky at the present day, and placed them all so that they should 
look on the Earth-woman, and she could look at them. He said, “Henceforth 
you shall not desert people, nor hide yourselves, but shall remain where you 
can always be seen at night or by day. Henceforth you will look down on 
the Earth.” ® Then he transformed the woman into the present earth.” Her 
hair became the trees and grass; her flesh, the clay; her bones, the rocks; 
and her blood, the springs of water. Old-One said, “Henceforth you will be 
the earth, and people will live on you, and trample on your belly. You will 
be as their mother, for from you, bodies will spring, and to you they will go 
back. People will live as in your bosom, and sleep on your lap. They will 
derive nourishment from you, for you are fat; and they will utilize all parts 
of your body. You will no more weep when you see your children.” 
After this the earth gave birth to people, who were very similar in 
form to ourselves: but they knew nothing, and required neither food nor 
drink. They had no appetites, desires, knowledge, or thoughts. Then Old- 
One travelled over the world and among the people, giving them appetites    
  
+ Some say the beaver lives or sits at his right hand, and the coyote at his lef. See soother Nicola story, whee the beaver is spoken of as sitting near the Old-One (p. 328). 2 Some say it will burst up and break whea it falls; others say it will be transformed, and made into better world, 2 Some add, of large stature. + Some add, he was chief of the people. # Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 53. * Some say, the Sua was commanded to visit the Earth every night. He thus sleeps with, or spends the, eight with his old wife and he is seen leaving in the morning, and returaisg to her at night. 7 Some say there was a former earth, and that most of the people belonging to it were drowned. ome say, the people may have been brought out of the earth in the same manner that elk and some other animals were; or they may have sprung from the union of the Sun and Earthrwoman: thas they would be children of the Sun. But some think the latter were transformed into stars, and that people sprang from those people who survived the flood of a former earth,   
   
 

----

322 ‘TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
and desires, and causing all kinds of birds and fish to appear, to which he 
gave names, and ascribed to them certain positions and functions. He said 
to the people, “Where you sce fish jump, there you will find water to drink. 
It will quench your thirst, and keep you alive.” He taught the women how 
to make birch baskets, mats, and lodges, and how to dig roots, gather berries 
and cure them. He taught the men how to make fire, catch fish, shoot, 
snare, trap, and spear’ game. He taught them how to make nets, beaver- 
spears, and snares. He showed them the spa’fsan-tree, telling them the bark 
from it was the best for making thread and rope. He taught them how to 
make dead-falls for marten, and showed them the white and the black arrow- stone, telling them it was best for making knives, spear-points, and arrow- 
heads. He taught them how to snare grouse, and use the feathers on arrows 
so that they might go straight. He also told the people how to cook and eat 
salmon and other food, and showed them tobacco and pipe-stone, and how to smoke. He also taught the people the relationship of the sexes, how to 
have sexual intercourse, and how to give birth to children. When he had 
finished teaching them, he bade them good-by, saying. ‘I now leave you; but if you forget any of the arts I have taught you, or if you are in distress 
and require my aid, I will come again to you. The sun is as your father, 
and the earth as your mother. When you die, you will return to your 
mother’s body. You will be covered with her flesh as a blanket, under which 
your bones will rest in peace.” 
30. The Creation of the Earth by Old-One.! 
Old-One or Chief came down from the upper world on a cloud, which, 
when it approached the surface of the great lake, became a bank of fog. 
He was tired looking at the endless and monotonous expanse of water under- 
neath the sky, and thus had descended to create some kind of a world in 
the midst of the watery waste which was where the earth is now. The cloud 
descended until it rested on the surface of the lake. Then Old-One pulled 
five hairs from his head,’ and, throwing them down on the clouds, they became 
endowed with life, and sprang up in the form of young women. They were 
all perfect women endowed with speech, sight, and hearing. He asked the 
first one to speak and state what she preferred to be. She answered, *I 
wish ‘to be a woman and to bear children. I shall be bad and foolish, and 
shall seek after my own pleasure. My descendants will fight, lic, steal, murder, 
and commit adultery. They will be wicked.” The Chief answered her, saying, 
“I am sorry you have spoken thus, for in this way death and much sorrow 
will arise.”   
1 Another Teawa'xamuy. version. 2 The narrator aid he was Dot quite sure whether the hairs were from the head or pubes. He also said be thought they might have been five ribs taken by the chief from bis right side.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 323 
Now he asked the second woman to state what she wished to be. She 
answered, “I wish to be a woman and to bear children. I shall be good 
and virtuous. My descendants will be wise, peaceful, honest, truthful, and 
chaste.” The Chief was glad when he heard her speak thus, and said, “You 
have spoken well. ‘Wisdom and virtue will eventually triumph over foolish- 
ness and evil. The process will be very long, however, and there will be 
much sorrow and misery meanwhile.” 
Now the third woman was asked to choose her lot, and she answered, 
“I wish to be the earth, upon which my sisters will live. They will love me, 
and draw their life from me. 1 will make everything fat and happy.” The 
Chief answered, “It is good. From you everything will grow. You will 
produce, nourish, and give rest. When people dic, you will receive them on 
your breast and will cover them. Trees, plants, grass, flowers, gold, silver, 
and all that is good and beautiful, will spring from you. You will make 
your sister's children glad.” Now he asked the choice of the fourth woman, and she answered, “I 
wish to be fire, and will be in the grass, trees, and in all wood. I shall make people happy by giving them heat and comfort. When they are cold and 
miserable, they will seck me and obtain warmth and happiness. With my 
aid they will cat” The Chief answered, “It is good. You will render assist- 
ance, and make your sisters’ children rejoice.” Then he asked the fifth woman to speak, and she replied, *I wish to 
be water, and from me people will draw life and wisdom. Coming to me, . 
they will be cleansed of filth and disease; and by seeking me constantly, they 
will become wise, and obtain knowledge, dentalia, and riches. I will assist 
all -things on carth to maintain life” The Chief answered, “Good. You will 
assist, and make glad your sisters’ children.” Then he transformed them. The Earth fell backwards, spread out her 
legs, and rolled off from the cloud into the lake, where she took the form of the 
earth we live on. The Chief said, “My daughter, you will be as you have 
asked. Henceforth you will be the earth in the midst of the great lake, and 
people will live on you. They will call you their mother” Water he trans- 
formed into the present water we see in the shape of lakes, pools, springs, 
and streams, and it began to run over the top of the earth. Fire he trans- 
formed into the present fire, or the heat of fire we see and feel when wood burns. 
He put the spirit of fire in all woods and plants. The remaining two women 
he placed on the earth, and, after endowing them with the power to bear 
offspring, he impregnated them. He told them, “You will be sisters, and from 
you all people will spring. Your children will be male and female, and your 
descendants will cover the earth. The offspring of Evil will be most numerous 
at first, but at last the children of Good will outnumber them. Good will 
prevail, and Evil finally disappear. Then I will collect all people, both dead 
  41JRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VII.

----

324 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
and alive. Earth and her sisters will assume their original forms, and all 
together will become changed and new.”* In this manner will come the end 
of the world, and this is why both bad and good people are found in the 
world at the present day. The children of the two women were male and 
female. They married one another, and from them all people are descended. None of them could live without the earth, fire, and water: therefore these 
are part of us, and are related to people as if by blood. 
(The narrator of this story was a shaman called Nkamtcinélx, belonging 
to Sullis, and probably somewhat over seventy years of age. He stated 
that he never heard this tale except from his grandfather, — the first time 
when he was about eight or ten years of age. Other old men who had 
particular tales were Tcui¢'ska of Nicola, who had a story of a man who watched the women bathing from the top of a tree; and Ye'luska of Spences 
Bridge, who had a long tale of women who hung their babies up in trees 
or bushes, He did not remember the details of these stories, but had heard 
them narrated only by these men. Teuit’ska died a few years ago in Nicola, 
aged over cighty; and Ye'luska was killed in the Spences Bridge landslide 
in August, 1905, when aged about eighty.) 
31. Old-One and the Creation of the Nicola Country. 
Old-One was travelling about, and came upon a woman sitting in an 
attitude of grief. She was bent forward, and her hands covered her face. 
He asked her why she was sorrowful, and she answered, “Because I am alone 
and deserted” He said to her, “Do not be sorry, for I will make you great 
and the mother of many. All things will grow from you” He transformed 
her into the earth, which he made expand, and shape itself into valleys, 
mountains, and plains. Her bones became the rocks; the largest ones, the 
mountain ranges and ridges. Her blood dried up, and assumed the form of gold, copper, and other metals. Much of it ran to one place and congealed 
in the form of a large mass of gold among the mountains. (The whites 
know this, and therefore always search for gold in the mountains, and not 
on the plains. They value the woman's blood very much, and are anxious 
to find the large deposit. They will never be able to find it, however, for 
Old-One made the mountains all so much alike, that it will be impossible 
for them to find the spot) Now, Old-One commenced to make the Nicola 
country. He flattened, lowered, and heightened it here and there, until it   
© My informant was vague when questioned as to the nature of this change. He thought people might be conducted to the upper world, or placed on some new arth created for them. He was sure there would be a reusion of the desd and the liviag, who afterwards would sil live together under the same conditions. Both would have human form; aod there would be no more sickness, death, misery, and evil All would be good and happy. Conditions would be an improvement over both the spirit world and this world.  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 325 
became similar to what it is at the present day. Then he formed lakes, and 
made water flow in the form of rivers and creeks, and created fish, animals, 
and birds to inhabit it. He also made grass, trees, and bushes to grow 
where required. He said, Water will be the life of the earth and everything 
on it” Now he created four men and a woman, who became the first human 
inhabitants of the Nicola valley. They knew not how either to eat or work. 
He said to them, “Drink water: you need nothing clse to sustain you. It 
is the life of the earth, and from it you will draw life also. I will leave you 
now, but will visit you ere long.” These people had the desire to eat and 
to work, but knew not how to do either. The woman often gazed at the 
ground and grass, and felt she had some connection with them, or required 
to do something to them, or receive something from them, but knew not what. 
Likewise the men. One went to the trees and would gaze at them. He 
had the same feeling as the woman. Another went to the water and gazed 
at the fish swimming; another, at the deer running through the bushes; and 
another, at the beaver working in the lake. Sometimes they threw stones 
at the fish and animals; but these took no effect. At last Old-One returned 
to the country, and, saw the man gazing into the water. He asked him what 
he was looking at. The man answered, “I am looking at the fish swimming, 
and 1 feel 1 need them, but do not know for what purpose, nor yet do I 
know how to procure them. Perhaps you are the chief: you may help me.” 
Old-One took a magic knife from his right side and gave it to the man, 
saying, “Go to that service-berry-tree, and say to it, ‘My friend, I require 
you, then make the motion of cutting it down with the knife, and at once 
it will fall down as if it had been cut. Then bring it here to me” The 
man did as directed, and, when he had brought the tree, Old-One told him 
to squat down and shut his eyes. Now Old-One made motions at the tree 
with his knife, and it soon formed itself into a fish-spear. The man was 
asked to open his eyes, and was astonished, when he did so, to see the spear in front of him. Old-One said, “Take it in your hand, and come with me. 
1 will show you how to use it.” They went to the edge of the stream, and 
saw a large fish swimming; and Old-One told the man to make the motion 
of spearing it. When he did this, the fish transfixed? itself on the spear- 
head, and was thrown on the land dead. Old-One said, Henceforth men 
will spear fish in this fashion.” 
Now he came to the man who was watching deer on a trail, and asked 
him what he was looking at. The man answered, “I am watching the deer, 
and feel as if I had need of them, but know not why. I spend my time doing this” Giving him his magic knife, Old-One told him to go up the 
mountains to the yew-tree, and, after praying or talking nicely to it, to make pretence of cutting it down, and, when it fell, to bring a piece of the timber   
+ Some say, four women. Some say, jumped ashore, and died.

----

326 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
to him. The man did as directed, and brought back some of the wood. 
Now, Old-One told him to close his eyes, formed a bow and arrow, and then 
asked the man to look. He said, “Take these things in your hand, and 1 
will show you how to use them.” Just then a deer trotted along the trail, 
and Old-One told the man to make the motion of shooting it. When he 
did so, the deer fell down dead. Old-One said, “Henceforth men will kill 
deer with bows and arrows.” 
Now he came to the man who was at the lake watching the beavers 
building a dam, and asked him what he was looking at. He answered in 
terms similar to those of the others, and Old-One made a beaver-spear for 
him, and showed him how to use it. He said, “Henceforth men will kill 
beavers in this manner.” 
Now Old-One came to the man who was sitting looking at a tree, and 
asked him what he was gazing at. The man answered in the same way as the 
other men had done: so Old-One made tools, and showed him how to chop 
down trees. He also made a fire-drill, and taught him how to use it, and 
make fire of wood. He said, “Henceforth men will fell trees, and make fire. 
They will make tools and weapons, and will be workers, trappers, hunters, and 
fishermen.” He also taught the men how to make nets, and set snares. 
At last Old-One came to the woman, who was sitting looking at the 
ground, and asked her what she was gazing at. She, also, answered in the 
same manner as the men had done. He told her to shut her eyes, and, when 
she opened them again, a large plant had grown up before her. He asked 
her to go to the birchtree, and, after saying to it, “O friend! I require 
you to strip off its bark. This she did, brought the bark to him, and he 
rolled the plant in it. Now he told her to travel along that hillside, and 
throw away pieces of the plant. She did as directed, and, each time she put 
her hand in the roll, she pulled out a different kind of bulb or seed. Thus 
she sowed all the different kinds of plants used by the Indians for food or medicine; and from these sprang up many, and they spread over the whole 
country. They grew as soon as they touched the ground. Old-One told her 
their names, and said, “These only are edible.” Thus the Indians learned 
the edible varieties of roots and the proper kinds of herbs to use. When 
the plants had all been distributed, Old-One made the roll of birch into a 
basket. He also made a root-digger, and showed the woman how to dig roots. 
Now Old-One asked the men to bring their fish, deer, and beaver, and 
the fourth man to bring wood and make fire. Then he showed them how 
to cook fish, meat, and roots. He made a mat, and spread the food on it. He himself partook from the right side of everything, and showed the people how to eat. They followed his example, but ate from the left side of every- thing. Now he told them, “You will not live by drinking water only, but will eat fish, meat, roots, and berries. You will also use the skins of animals

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 327 
for clothes, and no longer go naked.” He showed them how to build lodges, 
and said, “Henceforth men will hunt, fish, and make tools, and women will 
dig roots, and make baskets and mats. You people will henceforth live thus 
as I have taught you, and inhabit this country until such time as you will 
join the dead. Now I leave you for a long time; but I will return to the 
earth some day, and then your mother, the Earth, from whom all things grow, 
will again assume her original and natural form.”? 
  32. Old-One and Women. 
In some parts of the world, formerly, the women had no privates, and 
consequently could have no sexual intercourse, nor give birth to children. In 
other parts of the world they gave birth only to male children. Likewise, some 
kinds of animals and birds had all female offspring, while other kinds had all 
male offspring. Old-One visited these people, and ordained that they should 
be right, saying, “Henceforth all women shall have proper female organs, 
shall have intercourse with men, and shall give birth to children. Henceforth 
all offspring of people, animals, birds, and fish, shall bring forth of their kind 
male and female in about equal proportions. There shall be no race exclusively 
males nor exclusively females.” 
33. Old-One and the Ku'tuen? 
Old-One met the Ku'tuen, who used to travel by means of his mouth, and 
transformed him, saying, “Henceforth you will be the ku'tuen-fish, and will 
ascend streams by sticking to the rocks with your mouth. You will always 
precede the salmon when they run, and will carry their breath ahead of them. 
34. Old-One and Sucker (Fish). 
When the people were being taught the arts by Old-One, the Sucker said to him, “You need not teach the people how to kill me: I will do that myself” Then he told the people to catch him with a net, and he would roll himself tightly in it, and die. They tried this, and found that he spoke the truth. Therefore the sucker, when caught in a net, is invariably found 
wrapped up in it, and dead when taken out.   
1 She will become a woman again. This wil be the end of the world; and all people, living and dead, will join the Old-One and Coyote, and retum with them to live in the upper world, where life will be similar to what it is at present in the land of shades. See Thompson beliefs regarding character of the land. of souls, ‘The Thompson Indios of British Columbia, Vol. 1 of this series, p. 343- 3 A Kind of fsb like a lamprey. or cl, which is said to move up stream by sticking to the rocks with its mouth.     

----

328 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
35. Old-One and the Beavers.! 
Old-One ordained that the beavers should be the most valuable of animals, because they were always nearest to him. His two servants and companions are beavers. One sleeps at the door of his house, and the other at the head of his bed. This is the reason why at the present day beaverfur is so much 
valued by both whites and Indians. 
36. Old-One teaches the People the Use of Ornaments. 
(Nkamtci nema.) 
Ntce'mka® was travelling through the Shuswap country in search of his wife, who had been stolen from Lytton by a cannibal. Old-One was also 
travelling in the Shuswap country at this time, and one night wandered into 
Nice'mka’s camp, which was in a hidden place. Ntce/mka did not know him; 
but, secing that the old man had a very dignified and wise appearance, he 
treated him very kindly. He gave him food and made up a soft bed for him. 
Ntce'mka was surprised when the stranger recognized him, and told him all 
about himself and where he would find his wife. When about to depart in 
the morning, Old-One pulled out four small bundles and gave them to Ntce'mka. 
They consisted of porcupine-quills, scalps of the red-headed woodpecker, eagle 
tail-feathers, and dentalium shells. He said, “Hitherto the value of these 
things has not been known, and people have not used them. Henceforth 
they will be much used and highly prized by all peoples for decorative pur- 
poses” In this way people first learned the use of these things, and after- 
wards became accustomed to decorate their persons and clothes with them. 
In later days eagle tailfeathers and woodpecker scalps became valuable and 
costly. Dentalia and quills were also much prized, and very much used by 
all the people.   
* Compare with tale No. 28, p. 320. 2 This is the same person who appears in the story of “Nice'mka and the Cannibal,” Traditions of the Thompson River Indisos, p. 80; see also No. 30, Uma, p. 254 of this volume.

----

III. — ORIGIN TALES. 
37. The Introduction of Death; or, the Council of Spider, Ant, and Fly. 
Formerly there was no death in the world, and people did not know 
exactly what it was. Ant and Spider were very wise. They held a council with Fly, Spider said to Ant, “You are cutting yourself in two with your 
tight belt. Soon you will die” Ant answered, “If I die, I shall not die 
properly. In four, six, seven, or cight days, I shall come to life again.” Spider said, “I think it would be better if all people and animals were to 
die properly: for if none die, soon there will be too many people on carth, and there will not be enough food for all. They will suffer the pains of 
hunger.” Ant answered, “The pains of hunger are as nothing compared with 
the pains that people will feel when their relatives, or those they love, die. 
I propose that we leave conditions as they are, and that people do not dic.” Spider and Ant argued long, but neither could convince the other: so they 
asked Fly for his opinion. 
These three men had been deputed by all the people and animals to 
decide whether death should be in the world or not. Fly was very selfish 
and cunning, and, taking sides with Spider, said, *I think it will be better 
if people die. They will still be useful, for I shall rear my young in their 
bodies. People will be better off if they die, for I will take charge of them, 
and preserve their bodies, so they will always be as if asleep. They will 
have no cares, nor will they need fire or food. I will look after them well, 
and their relatives will have no trouble or bother.” Now Ant spoke in vain, 
as there were two against him. So at last he gave way to the others, and 
it was ordained that people and all living things should die. Since that time, 
people have died. 
Soon afterwards Spider's child died. He felt very sad, and went to Ant, 
and said, “At the council you were right and I was wrong. The pain of a 
father's heart when his child dies is indeed worse than the pains of hunger. 
Let us put things right by declaring that people shall not die.” Ant answered, 
“Already death has entered the world. It has been agreed that death should 
be. It is now too late to change it.” Fly also attended this second meeting, 
and now spoke up, addressing Spider thus, “Why are you sorry? Those 
who die are better off than those who live. We will not revoke our decree. Take your dead child and lay it on the ground some distance away from 
your house. I will look after it for you. Did I not promise to undertake   
TA very common tale; see, for instance, A. L. Kroeber, Cheyeane Tales, Journal of American Folk-Lore, I, p. 161. 
[320]

----

330 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. - 
the care of all those who die?” Spider did as directed, and Fly laid eggs in 
the corpse, so that it soon became covered with worms and flies. It became 
swollen and black, and soon rotted and stank. Fly visited Spider, and told 
him his child looked just the same as ever. Shortly afterwards Spider went 
to view his child, and felt very sad when he saw the condition of the body. 
He cursed Fly, and transformed him, saying, “Henceforth you will be a fly, and will live among rottenness, and eat filth. You will be the most loath. 
some and unloved of all things” Then he dug a grave and buried his child's 
body, saying, Henceforth people will make graves, and bury their dead.”   
According to the Nkamtcinemux death was introduced by Raven, whose 
child was sick and who asked Old-One to let it die. Before that time people 
always revived after a short time. 
38. Frog and Moon.! 
This story is told in exactly the same way as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” pp. o1, 92, “The Moon and his Younger Sister.” 
30. Wolverine. 
(Named nemuz.) 
In the mythological period Wolverine was known as a great and successful 
hunter, and as a man of great strength. He could easily carry two large 
deer on his back at one time. Wolf was the only one who equalled him in 
strength. 
40. Sna'naz and the Wind? 
This story, from the beginning to the end of the 15th line on p. 88, is like No. 34 in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians.” The chief spoken of was also a shaman of great 
power and ugly character. From the 15th line, the story of the flight is the same in all details 
as that told by Hill-Tout, pp. 50, 51, and the fist line of p. 5a. Here the story ends with Sna'naz reaching home with the girl. 
41. Men and Women. 
(Nkamtei'nzmuz.) 
Formerly men menstruated, and women did not; but the latter were 
jealous of the men, thinking they were the better off. They laughed at them   
+ Compare Shuswap, p. 653; UtE'mqt, p. 229 of this volume. = Compare also Shuswap, p. 702, and Nicola story, Sna'naz and the Shaman in this collection. + See Shuswap, p. 626. 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 331 
when they complained of the hardship, and said, “Let us menstruate.” The men agreed, and after that it was ordained that the women henceforth should menstruate, and not the men. Thus it remains to the present day.’ 
42. Women and Deer giving Birth. 
(Nkamtci nemuz.) 
Formerly women gave birth with the same case that deer do now, while 
deer had as much pain in giving birth as women have at present. When 
the deer complained of their hardship, the women laughed, and said, “Let 
us change” They changed, and it was ordained that henceforth the women 
should have childbirth pains, and the deer be exempt. 
43. The White-Fish. 
(Nkamtei'nimuz.) 
The White-Fish (manuf) was a shaman. He was twisting thread for a 
fishing-line, and whistling to himself, when a transformer came along and 
transformed him into the present whitefish. His mouth retained the same shape it had when whistling, and this is the reason of the small puckered 
mouth of the whitefish at the present day. 
The sucker was also a shaman and a fisherman, and was engaged making 
a net when the same transformer came along and transformed him into the 
sucker of the present day. According to some, the Qwo'qtqwaL were the 
transformers who did this. 
  44. Origin of the Elk. 
The first elk came out of the ground in the east, where the sun rises 
from the carth. Therefore he is said to have come out from under the sun. 
Travelling west he met the Grasshopper brothers, who were out hunting. 
When Mountain Grasshopper (séikala’te) saw him, he said, What strange 
Deer is this?” and hid in the grass. When Elk got nar, he jumped on his 
hind leg, and then into his anus. He crowled along until he reached Elks 
heart, and cut it off. Then Elk commenced to stagger, and at last fell over 
dead? The common Grasshopper searched for his brother. He found EIK's 
tracks and said, “Oh, what large tracks! This monster must have trod on my 
big-bellied brother, and crushed him to death.” At that moment he heard 
his brother call, went in the direction of the voice, and found the dead elk.$   
See Shuswap, p. 626. * Compare p. 283, Shuswap, p. 646. 3 Some say the mountain grasshopper was stil inside the elk, and was cut out by his brother. 
42—JUSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VILL

----

332 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Then they cut it up, ate some of the fat, and carried the rest home. Thus 
was the first elk seen and slain. Soon after this, two more clks came out 
from underneath the sun; and from them or others that came afterwards clk 
multiplied and became very numerous.! 
45. Sun and his Questioner. 
(Nkamtei nemuz.) 
Once the people sent a man to the Sun to ask him questions and get 
knowledge. He asked the Sun how to know the people who would live long, 
and those who would be shortlived. The Sun answered, “Those people who 
lic in bed until the sun shines upon them will be shortlived, while those 
who rise carly, and are careful never to let the sun shine on them when 
asleep, will be long-lived.” 
46. Origin of Land and Water Mysteries.* 
Formerly the people on earth were very bad, and especially those who 
lived in the western part of it, between the Cascade Mountains and the sea. 
In the west were many bad shamans who continually wrought evil; but the people of the east were not so bad. Now Beaver! who lived east of the 
Cascades, caused a great flood to come, which drowned all the bad people.* 
At this time originated land mysteries (yayao¥'muy) and water mysteries 
(xaxaa'tko). As the flood receded, it left all the hollows and holes of every 
size full of water, thus forming an immense number of lakes and ponds. 
Many of these took a long time to dry up, and some continue still in the 
form of stagnant ponds and lakes of peculiar color® As the water receded, 
the corpses of the bad shamans and ancients endowed with magic were left 
on the ground to rot, or drifted into the lakes, where they disappeared ; while their spirits took up their abode in the places where their bodies dissolved. 
Thus those who were left on dry land became land mysteries, that live under- 
ground; while the others became water mysteries, and live under water. 
They are like ghosts, and haunt many lakes and mountains. They show 
themselves in a great variety of forms, and their influence is often felt, for 
they portend calamity when seen, give hunters who are near their haunts bad 
luck and bad weather. They seem to reign over certain places, and are always feared and propitiated by hunters and others who camp in their domain.   
1 AC one time elks were very common in many parts of the Okanagon and Thompson countries and especially so in Nicola. About fifty years ago they had become scarce, and at the present day they are extinct in the above-named places. + Compare with stories of the flood. See Teit, The Thompson Tndiaus of British Columbia, Val. 1 of this series, p. 338. 2 Some say, Old-One and not the beaver. © All the good people saved themselves in canoes. + Stagnant lakes, or lakes with yellow scum on them, are often called yazatko

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 333 
Thus people paint their faces, give them gifts, and pray to them for good 
luck, good weather, and ask them not to harm them. They are also of 
service to those who seek them and wish to gain wisdom from them, for 
many shamans have trained in these places. As most of the bad people and 
shamans were drowned in the west, therefore there are many more of these 
mysteries there than in the cast. Thus originated most of the land and water 
mysteries now inhabiting the earth; but, like ghosts, they do not remain 
forever, and of late years they are seldom scen, and in many places where 
they abounded, their power seems to have gone. 
47. Beaver and the Flood.! 
Formerly the people were very bad, therefore Beaver ® caused a great 
rain to come, which flooded the earth so that all the people were drowned. 
Beaver had power over rain and water, and could do with them as he liked. 
He was a great shaman; but the people did not believe that he had very 
great power, and laughed at him when he told them he would make a flood 
to cover the whole carth. For many moons he worked making a large canoe 
to hold his family* and a male and female of cach kind of animal and bird. 
When he had finished, the rain commenced ; and soon the country was flooded until the tops of all the mountains were submerged. As soon as all the bad 
people were drowned, Beaver made the rain stop and the waters did not rise 
any more. They receded very slowly, and Beaver's daughters became impatient, 
and longed to see the earth again. Their food, also, commenced to be short, and the animals and birds all were quite lean. 
Now Beaver sent the Tse'mok-bird to see if any land could be found; 
but he returned without having seen any. Then he sent the Eagle to soar; 
but he, also, returned without having seen any land. Next he sent the Raven, 
who found enough to rest on, and ate of the corpses which were floating 
about. As he did not return, Beaver sent the Tsc'mok again, who found 
the Raven, came back and reported what he had seen. Lastly Beaver sent 
the Ya'teayatehawk, and he came back with leaves and twigs to show that 
the trees were above water. Now Beaver steered his canoe to a mountain-top, 
landed, and set loose all the birds and animals. From this point they dispersed 
when the waters had receded sufficiently. It took many years for the earth 
to become dry, and many more years before the hollows dried up. Even 
now many of the lakes left by the flood have not disappeared. 
  
© This ix evidently the widely spread tradition of Beaver and the food, strongly influenced by biblical elements. See p. 230 of this volume; Shuswap, p. 678; also known to the Lillooet. , 
+ According to some, this man's name was not Beaver, but No'a; according to others, his name was Louis. + The family consisted of Beaver and his two daughters only.  

----

334 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
48. Nqa'ksasisatwauy.! 
The people of earth wished to visit the upper world and to make war 
on its inhabitants. The chief called all the men together to discover the onc 
could shoot the farthest. They all shot at the sky: but their arrows fell short. 
At last the Wren? who was the smallest man, shot his arrow, and it stuck in 
the sky. Now the next best shooter shot his arrow, and it stuck in the notch 
of Wren's arrow. Now, one after another, they shot their arrows, and each 
stuck in the notch of the preceding one, until at last there was an arrow- 
chain which hung from sky to carth. Up this they climbed, and attacked 
the people of the upper world. They were beaten in battle, however, and 
driven back with great slaughter. Some managed to get down the ladder in 
time;® but others were still on it when their enemies broke it at the top, 
and these were killed by the fall. Many were made prisoners or killed in 
the upper world, and transformed into stars. Thus the many small stars we 
see are the transformed bodies of this numerous war-party. 
49. Origin of Light 
A very large dead tree grew on a hill called Yegatwa'uzus cuxcu'z 
near Spences Bridge. It was endowed with magic, and in some manner 
possessed light® At that time it is said the world was always dark. The 
Chipmunk did not like the continual darkness, and, going to the tree, set 
fire to its roots. He kept the fire going, and, as the tree burned, light 
commenced to come. At last when it fell, light at once broke over the earth, and since then there has always been daylight. 
50. Light and Darkness.” 
Formerly the animals were undecided whether they should have constant 
light or constant darkness. Grisly Bear and many others wanted the latter, 
while Chipmunk and many more wished the former. They strove, and Grisly 
Bear's party prevailed in magic; and continued darkness settled over the 
world. Now, Chipmunk knew, that, if he burned the magic tree near Spences   
1 This word means probably, “amows strike notches of one another.” The first past of the word is hard to translate properly. Compare this story with Shuswap and Uma, p. 246 of this volume. Some say another bird, ot the wren. 5 Some say these sre now the animals, that are on carth. If all the people had got back, there would likely be many more kinds of animals and birds on earth thao there are now. 4 Compare this with Traditions of the Thompson River Indiaus, xv. ® Means “covered with earth one another grisly bear.” © Oc hindered light from coming into the world. None of my informants seemed to know exactly in what way the tree possessed light or hindered light. Compare this with Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, xv; see also p. 318 of this volume.  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 335 
Bridge, the world would become light again: so he set fire to its roots, and 
poked the ashes away with a stick, that the wind should fan the flame. When 
the tree fell, the earth became light. Then Grisly Bear appeared in a great 
rage, and commenced to extinguish the flame by throwing earth on the log 
and on Chipmunk, and crying, “lc pa, le pal” Chipmunk would poke the 
log, and cry, “Tse ka, tse ka!” and light would stream up; but when Grisly Bear threw on earth, darkness would come again. Thus they strove, and 
neither altogether prevailed: so it was agreed that it should be part day and part night. Grisly Bear was angry at Chipmunk, and chased him into 
a hole, tearing his back, and leaving the marks or stripes we sce on the chipmunk now. 
51. Thunder and Turtle! 
Thunder was angry, and urinated, trying to drown the people. He could not urinate long enough, however, to cause a heavy flood, and the people all escaped. Then he shot arrows at them, and killed and wounded many. 
They all hid, except Turtle, who said, “I am not afraid: he cannot harm me.” 
Turtle called out to Thunder, “You shoot in vain. You cannot kill people. 
Shoot at rocks and trees: you may kill them.” Thunder laughed, and answered, “You liar! 1 have already killed some of them.” Turtle said, “You have not killed them. They lie still, and only pretend to be dead.” Thunder 
answered, ‘You liar! I shall kill you” and he shot many times at Turtle, 
who moved around quite unconcerned, for the arrows all glanced off his back. 
When Thunder saw that he could not hurt Turtle, he believed all people 
were like him: and since then he has always fired his bolts at trees and rocks. 
Thus Turtle saved the people. 
52. Thunder and Mosquito.* 
Thunder lived in the clouds,! and Mosquito used to visit him. Thunder 
said to the latter, “How is it you are so fat, while I am so lean? What do 
you eat on earth to make you so fat?” Mosquito replied that he ate blood. Thunder said, “Where do you get it? I, also, want to eat blood and become fat.” Now, Mosquito knew, that, if he told the truth, Thunder would kill the 
people: so he answered, “I suck it from the tree-tops.” Then Thunder shot 
at the trees, and killed many of them, but could find no blood. Again 
Mosquito visited Thunder, and the latter said, “Why did you lie to me? 
Now tell me where you get blood, or I will kill you” Mosquito answered,   
+ Compare No. 52. * Compare with Shuswap, p. 709; alto with Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, xi. sad Utt'mat, P. 229 of this volume. + Some say, the sky.

----

336 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
“I get it from the Turtle” Now Thunder shot at Turtle, but his fiery arrows 
glanced off Turtles back, and did him no harm. Thus Mosquito saved the 
people, and never again visited Thunder, for he was afraid that the latter 
might kill him. Even now Thunder sometimes shoots at the trees and at turtles, trying to get blood. 
53. Loon. 
The Loon was a great Shaman, and used to kill and eat his friends. 
He made his body spotted with white by touching it with his fingertips 
during his period of training. Some of the Uta’mqt say the spots on his 
body were originally dentalia. 
54. Sun and Moon} 
Sun and Moon were both chiefs who looked after and cared for the 
people. One day they quarrelled, and found fault with one another. Sun 
said to Moon, “You give too faint a light: the people cannot see properly. 
Besides, you do not warm them.” Moon retorted, “I am prettier than you. 
The people like to look at me because I am beautiful. You are ugly. They 
cannot look at you without feeling ashamed, and turning aside their faces. Besides, you are too hot for the people, and make them perspire and feel 
uncomfortable. I do not burn folks up as you do.” At last, however, the 
two came to an agreement to alternate in looking after the people, — the 
Sun by day and the Moon by night, and they have continued to do this to 
the present day. Formerly, it is said, both shone at one time. 
55. The Ants and the Fleas. 
The Ants lived in a house on one side of a canyon through which ran 
a narrow river. They were very numerous. In another house, at the bottom 
of the river, lived the Tsokomu’s fish, who had a large net. The Ants 
wished to migrate, and asked a loan of Tsokomu’s' net. They spread it 
across the canyon, and all crossed on it. Then Tsokomu’s took back his net, 
and transformed the Ants, saying, “Henceforth you will be ordinary ants with 
small waists. You will cover the earth in the warm season, and you will 
shift your camps all the time.” 
The Fleas were also very numerous, and wished to migrate. They took 
their large dog? and rode on him. As he went along, they jumped off here 
and there. After travelling same distance, it came the turn of the last flea 
to jump off. Then the Dog transformed the Fleas, saying, “Henceforth you   
+ Compare A. L. Kroeber, Chegeane Tales, Joumal of American Folk-Lore, XIII, 1900, No. vi, p. 164. * Some say a horse.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 337 
will be ordinary fleas, and will, in the warm season, cover the earth, jumping 
from place to place. You will always be shifting camp.” 
The Dog changed himself into a Pine Jay,! saying, Henceforth I shall 
be a pine jay, and shall also be constantly on the move, hopping from branch 
to branch and from tree to tree.” Therefore the pine jay is seldom seen to 
“hop back and forth like other birds, but almost always seems to be moving 
forward, as if on the march from one place to another. 
56. Beaver and Muskrat? 
(Nkamtei'nsmuz.) 
Formerly the muskrat had a broad tail like that of the beaver at the 
present day, while the beaver had a narrow tail, like that of the muskrat 
now. One day Beaver asked the loan of Muskrat's tail to try it, and gave 
his own to Muskrat to try. Beaver found that Muskrat's tail was much better 
than his own for swimming with, and thereafter kept it. He always avoided 
Muskrat, who was now unable to catch him. When they were transformed, 
it was ordained that each should keep the tail he had. The Transformer 
said that Beaver had more need of the large tail than Muskrat. 
57. Blue Jay and Sweat-house.® 
Blue Jay is related to Sweathouse. He was the greatest joker of the 
ancients, and was always poking fun at the people. If any one made fun 
of him, or imitated him, his mouth became twisted. He was the originator 
of the twisted-mouth disease, and introduced it into the world. Before that 
persons with twisted mouths were unknown. 
Blue Jay and Sweathouse lived among the people, and slept in a corner 
of the house. Sweat-house took the form of the bent stick of a sweat-house, 
and slept by day. At night he changed into an old man, and wandered 
about, while Blue Jay slept in his place. The people did not know that 
Sweat-house was a man. Finally the people became tired of Blue Jay's 
mockery, and fearful of his magic, and made up their minds to desert him. 
They kept away for four years, living in a different place each summer and 
each winter. At the end of that time Blue Jay was still alive, and continued 
to live in the same place. Then they agreed to leave for good, and settled 
in another country. At last a transformer * came along and transformed Blue   
T Pine Jay or Whisky Jack. 3 Compare Shuswap, p. 650. 3 Compare story of Ok-One aod the Sweat-house, Shuswap, p. 642. 4 Some add that he used to get up in a tree and hide, then, by imitating the voices of other persons, would bring them near, and suddenly jump down smog them with o fierce shout, feightening them. The blue jay has a habit of acting similarly with small birds. 5 Some say, Old-One; others say, Coyote, or, perhaps, Quo'qlqwat.

----

338 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Jay, saying, “Henceforth you will be a bird, and a chatterer and mocker for- 
ever, able to talk incessantly, and to imitate the cries of the eagle and other birds and animals” This is the reason why the blue jay is able, at the 
present day, to imitate the cries of all kinds of birds and animals. Then he transformed Sweathouse, saying, “You, old man, will be the spirit of the 
sweathouse,! and, until the world ends, people, by sweat-bathing, and praying: 
to you, will lose their lice, and become healthy, clean, successful, and rich. 
You will be very powerful, and able to help the people, and grant their 
prayers.” 
58. The Theft of Fire 
The people of Nicola and Spences Bridge had no fire, and no means of 
procuring it, for wood did not burn in those days. Of all people, only those 
at Lytton had fire. Beaver, Weasel, and Eagle agreed that they would try 
to steal fire from the Lytton people, who were living at a little spring near 
the mouth of Thompson River.! Beaver went there first, and commenced to 
dam up the water, while Eagle and Weasel went training in the mountains. 
The fourth day when they were sweatbathing, Weasel's guardian spirit 
appeared in the form of a weasel, and entered his sweathouse. Here it cut itself open, and Weasel, entering its body, assumed animal form. Eagles 
guardian spirit came to his sweathouse, in the form of an eagle. He also 
let Eagle enter his body, so that he assumed the form of a bird. Eagle said, “I will fly far up, and watch brother Beaver.” And Weasel 
said, “I will run along the high mountain-ridges, and see what brother Beaver 
is doing” When they came within sight of Lytton, they saw that they had 
no time to lose, for Beaver was already a prisoner in the hands ‘of the people, 
who were making ready to cut him up. Eagle swooped down and perched 
on the laddertop of the underground house, while Weasel busied himself 
making a hole at the base of the house that the water might flood it. The 
people’ were so anxious to shoot Eagle, that they forgot all about Beaver, 
and never saw Weasel. They could not hit Eagle, however, and got angry 
at one another for missing. Meanwhile the water which Beaver had dammed 
up commenced to pour in through the hole Weasel had made, and, in the 
confusion, Beaver snatched up a fire brand, put it in a clamshell, ran off 
with it, and escaped. 
When the three reached home, Beaver made a fire for the people. Eagle 
showed them how to cook, and how to roast food; and Weasel showed them   
+ tawalu's, the “Grandfather,” Great 2 Compare Tradi River Indians, XII, pp. 56-57; also Shuswap, p. 669; Uma, P- 229 of this volume; also known to the Lillooet. 3 Where the preseat India village of Lytton is.    
   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 339 
how to boil food with stones. They threw some of the fire at each of the 
different kinds of wood, and, since that time, all kinds of wood burn. 
50. Rattlesnake-Woman.! 
At one time a woman of very handsome appearance and enticing manners 
used to wander through the mountains. When she saw a man, she went 
ahead to where he would pass, and sat in the way to offer herself to him. 
Captivated by her beauty, her charming manner, and persuasive words, every 
one fell a victim to her wiles. Her privates were the mouth of a rattlesnake, 
and every man who had connection with her was bitten, and died. Thus 
many hunters never returned home, and the bones of men were plentiful in 
the mountains where the woman roamed. At last Coyote met her on the 
south side of Thompson River, a little below Spences Bridge, transformed her 
into an ordinary rattlesnake, and threw her up the river. For this reason 
rattlesnakes are now numerous in the neighborhood of Spences Bridge, and 
above for some distance, but not below that place. 
60. The Rattlesnakes and Mesa’i.* 
Rattlesnake-ofthe-North had a house in the Okanagon® country, where 
he lived with his wife, Bow-Snake,* and his brothers, Wasp and Bee. He 
had a set of new teeth and two old teeth. The former he kept for himself, 
and the latter he gave to his brothers, saying, “These will be your fangs. 
When you sting people, it will cause soreness and swelling; but those you 
bite will not die. With me it will be different. When I bite any living thing, 
it will die; but I will never bite any one without first warning him with my 
rattle, which I will always carry with me. A person who treats me respect- 
fully, and says, ‘Pass on, friend, I will not harm; but those who laugh at or 
mock me I will kill” Turning to his wife, he said, “You are a woman. It 
would not be right for you to have the power of killing any one.” This is 
the reason why the rattlesnake's bite at the present day is deadly, while that 
of the bow-snake in harmless; also, why wasps and bees have stings that 
cause pain and swelling. 
Rattlesnake-of-the-North had many children, most of them sons. Rattle- 
snake-of-the-South also had many children. He lived across the ‘sxaraken 
River® Between the homes of these people lay a flat tract of country, 
    
1 Compare with story of Xoflakwa'xa (No. 78), and, also, with Uma, p. 221 of this volume; Shuswap, P. 650; also known to the Lilloet. 2 Name of a strong-smelling root eaten by the Thompson and Okanagon Indians. It is said not to grow on the Canadian side of the line. 2 On the British Columbian side of the line. 4 Also called milkesnake. © On the American side, in eastern Washington.   
43 JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VIN

----

340 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
consisting of clay, mud, and small lakes. This land was the home of Mesa’, 
who had two daughters, One of them she? sent to marry the son of Rattle- 
snake-of-the-North, and the other to marry the son of Rattlesnake-of-the-South. 
Both girls were refused, the mother Rattlesnakes saying they would not have 
daughtersinlaw who smelled so badly. When they returned, Mesz’i felt 
indignant, and went to the houses of both Rattlesnakes, asking why they had 
insulted her, and had refused her daughters. The Rattlesnakes answered, 
“We do not care to have our sonsrmarried to women who smell as badly 
as yourself and your daughters” Mesa’i replied, “Since you have insulted 
me, no Rattlesnake shall henceforth enter my country. If you swim across 
the river to it, soon after you touch the shore you will die.” This is the 
reason why no rattlesnakes are found in that tract of country at the present 
day. The place is called Smelta’us, and mesairoots are very plentiful there. 
North and South of SmeltZ'us, rattlesnakes are abundant. 
61. Wren and the Cannibal Eagle 
(Nkamici nemuz.) 
In the cliff called Halauallst or Halau#'ist® a monster Eagle had his 
house. He lived there many years, and attacked all who passed by. The 
ground around the base of the cliff was white with the skulls and bones of 
his many victims. He would pounce on people and tear them to pieces, or 
he would fly up with them and kill them by dashing them against the cliff 
or by letting them drop to the ground from a great height. At last Wren 
(tsttso's), who lived at the mouth of Nicola River and who had developed great magical power, made up his mind to kill the Eagle. The other people were afraid, and advised Wren not to attempt it, but he persisted. He dressed himself in birch-bark armor, sharpened his small knife which he always carried, and repaired to the cliff. The people followed at a distance to learn his fate. He had put red paint in one side of his mouth, and white paint in the other. The Eagle pounced on him, and tried to tear him in pieces, but his armor 
protected him. Then he lifted him up and dashed him against the cliff 
Now Wren let the paint run out of his mouth; and the people, seeing it, 
said, “See! He is dead, his blood and brains run down the rock.” The Eagle also thought he was dead; but, to make sure, he dropped him to the ground. Now more paint ran out of Wren's mouth; and the Eagle, thinking 
him quite dead, released him. Now the Eagle walked around him and back- wards and forwards, wondering where he could break through his armor to   
1 It is not clear whether Mes was male or female. * Compare Shuswap tory in “Dawson, Notes on the Shuswap People of Bish Columbin, p. 32. 2 This place is a litle over half a mile east of Spences Bridge depot, on the main lie of the Canadisn Pacific Railroad.  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 341 
eat him. Finally he perched on top of him; and Wren, seeing his chance, 
stabbed Eagle from underneath with his knife, and killed him. He pulled 
out the tail-feathers, and scattered the remains of the Eagle. Throwing them 
towards the mountains, he said, “Henceforth cagles shall be only ordinary 
birds, and shall prey on small game. They shall not kill people any more, 
and men will use their tail-feathers for decorative purposes.” The cliff is still 
marked with red and white streaks where the paint ran from Wren’s mouth.

----

IV. — ANIMAL TALES. 
62. The Black and the Grisly Bears.' 
This story is told exactly as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” p. Go. 
63. Marten and Fisher. 
‘This story is the same as the Shuswap® one (p. 673) with the following variations only: — Fisher told Marten, if any bird appeared from the east (some say west), he was not to shoot at it. One day a small bird with bright red plumage appeared, and Marten became very anxious to shoot it, He wondered why his brother had told him not to shoot at any bird which appro- ached from the east. He fired his best arrow at it, and missed. The hird caught it up and ran away leisurely with it. He fired again, with the same result, the bird taking that arrow also. Thus he fired three times. The fourth time his arrow stuck in the top of a log protuding from the ground, which he discovered was the ladder of an underground house. The bird pulled out the arrow, and descended into the house.    
64. Wren and the Elks.® 
Wren went hunting Elk, and came on a lot of old droppings. He asked 
the latter where their owners were, and they answered, “On a certain hillside.” 
He went to the place, and saw a large herd of clk. He called to them, ‘I 
want you,” and one of them answered by approaching him. Telling him to 
turn round, he examined him, and said, “No, I do not want you. You 
are not fat enough” Again he called, and another animal answered him; 
and thus he examined one after the other, and rejected the whole herd until 
only one remained. Again he said, “I want yous” and the last animal came 
forward. Telling him to turn around, he said, “Oh, yes! I want you. Why did you not come before? You are very fat.” Then he jumped into Elks 
anus, and told him to walk down to a flat near by. When he arrived there, 
he took his small knife, cut Elks heart, and thus killed him. Then he came out 
again, danced around EIk, singing, *Oh, I am glad! I have killed an elk. 
Oh! he is fat. I will now eat his meat.” Now he would have butchered 
the animal, but discovered that he had forgotten his knife inside, and he 
could not enter a dead animal. He did not know what to do, and walked   
+ Compare Shuswap p. 681, U'mqt, p. 218 of this volume. 2 Compare also Utmgt, p. 236, Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 643 A. L. Kroeber Cheyenne Tales, Journal of American Folk-Lore, XIII, No. xix, p. 183; also Chilcotia, Vol. IL of this series, p. 41. 3 Compare p. 308, No. 11; p. 331, No. 44] also Shuswap, p. 646; A. L. Kroeber, Ute Tales, Journal of American FolkeLore, XIV, pp. 270, 271. + The narrator said that in telling this story, which differs slightly in the, various tribes, the Teawa'samuy tell of a herd of elk the other Niakw'pamuy generally claim they were deer; while most of the Oksagon say they were bufislos.   
    
  
[342]

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 343 
around the carcass, singing, “How can 1 butcher it? Oh, if I had my knife! 
Oh! if some one would give me a knife. Oh, if I only had something to 
butcher it with!” 
Now Wolf and Coyote were out hunting, and were resting near that 
place. Wolf heard Wren singing, and said to Coyote, “I wonder what that 
little fellow means. He wants something to butcher with. He must have 
killed something. Let us go and see” They came upon Wren, walking 
around the carcass of the elk. He asked them for the loan of a knife, saying 
he would give them half the meat; but they said they would butcher it for 
him. They found Wren's knife inside. They took all the meat and fat for 
themselves, leaving only the paunch for Wren! 
65. Moose, Buffalo, Antelope, and White-tailed Deer. 
In ancient times Moose, Buffalo, Antelope, and White-tailed Deer lived 
together. They were relatives and lived in the same lodge. Their home was 
somewhere in the Salish country, probably in Montana or in eastern Wash- 
ington. Moose was a chief and Buffalo a warrior. Antelope was celebrated as a runner, and Whitetail was lame. All four had rather large antlers and 
horns, somewhat similar in shape. Buffalo would sharpen his horns, and use 
them for fighting. 
After a time the four friends became jealous of one another, and often 
quarrelled. Especially did they disagree about the selection of camping-grounds. 
No matter how well chosen, no one place would suit them all. White-tail 
preferred to camp among bushes; Buffalo liked the alkali.plains; Moose loved 
the partly timbered plateaus; and Antelope, the foothills. At last they held 
counsel, and came to the conclusion that it would be better to separate and 
henceforth live apart, each one in the kind of country he preferred. White: 
tail was the first to leave. Moose said to him, “You must not go north, for 
the people there are bad, and many of them are cannibals. They will kill and eat you. Yourself, wife, and children are all a little lame. The northern 
people are great hunters. They will soon find you and catch you.” White- tail answered, “I can run faster than you think, and I am not afraid of the 
northern cannibals. I love the northern country, and intend to live there.” 
Moose said, “Well, if you will go north, take my antlers: they are larger 
and stronger than yours, and you can defend yourself better with them.” 
Whitetail answered, “No, chief, I will not take your antlers. They are too 
heavy. Their weight would fatigue me, were I chased by enemies.” Now 
Whitetail worked on his antlers, and Moose helped him. He made them 
small, and fitted them close to the head, with the tines rounded and pointing   
* The narrator said this story is sometimes told at greater length, and ia more detail; but, as he was not sure of the rest, he told just what he 
 

----

344 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
inward, especially the upper ones, that they would not catch in the bushes. 
Moose lengthened his tail, fitted him up suitably for the country in which he 
intended to live henceforth, and accompanied him on his journey as far as a 
place called Sielamen.! Here he bade him farewell, and Whitetail and his family ran backwards and forwards, showing Moose that they were much 
fleeter than he had thought they were. Now Whitetail took up his abode 
near where the boundary line now runs, and from there he ranged north 
through the Okanagon country to about Penticton, east through the Kootenai, 
west across the Similkameen, and south through eastern Washington. He 
lived in the bushes, and his enemies could not catch him. When Moose, on his way home, had gone as far as somewhere in Idaho 
or Montana, Buffalo met him and caused a large lake® to appear in front of 
him. Because he was so heavy, Moose was afraid to swim across, and thus 
had almost made up his mind to return north, when Buffalo told him he 
would make a bridge for him to cross on, if he would promise to shape his 
horns so that he could fight well. Moose agreed to do this and Buffalo made 
a bridge across the lake with his horns and tail, and Moose passed safely 
over. When they arrived at home, Moose fitted up Buffalo by making his 
hair thick and shaggy, lengthening his tail, and sharpening his horns. Now 
Buffalo became very fierce and powerful, and had no fear of his enemies, 
who always fled because of his sharp horns. Moose accompanied him to the 
east, where he left him on the open plains. He also fitted up Antelope, and 
escorted him to the rolling hills west of where he had left Buffalo. Antelope 
was not afraid of his enemies because he was so fleet of foot and had such 
sharp eyesight. Now Old-One or some other Transformer came along and found Moose 
living on a plateau. He transformed him into the present-day moose, saying, 
“Henceforth you will be the animal moose, and will alwas be large and clumsy. 
Men will hunt you, and use your hide for tents.” The Transformer came to 
where Buffalo lived, and transformed him, saying, “Henceforth you will be a 
common buffalo, and only ocaasionally will you be fierce, and able to kill 
men and horses with your sharp horns; but men will lie in wait on your trail, 
and will shoot you with bow and arrows. Your skin they will use for blankets 
and robes.” The Transformer came to where Antelope lived, and transformed 
him also, saying, Henceforth you will be an antelope, and will live on the 
edge of the buffalo country. You will be known as the fleetest of animals; 
but men will hunt you, and use your hide for making shirts.” White Tailed 
Deer was also transformed into the present animal of that name, and ordained 
to roam through the country he had selected. For this reason the White- 
tailed deer is seldom seen even as far north as the Nicola.   
1 In eastern Washington, not far from the boundary line. 2 This lake created by the bufslo remains to the present day, but the narrator had forgotten its name.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 345 
66. Bald-headed Eagle! 
Bald-headed Eagle and Ra'tarat lived in neighboring underground houses. 
he heads of the houses, and their respective people were in the ng one another, and playing lehal. A girl from a distant place 
was sent by her parents to marry Ra'tarat. On her way to the latter's house, 
she came to a stream spanned by a log, in the middle of which stood Bald- 
headed Eagle. She said to him, “Friend, let me pass;” but he never answered. 
Then she said, “Cousin, let me across” but he paid no attention. Then she 
said, “Brother, let me pass over; but he never heeded. Then she said, 
“Husband, let me passy’ and he answered quickly, “Why did you not say 
that at once?” He let her cross over, and then, claiming her as his wife, 
took her to his house. She did not like her husband nor his relatives, who 
were all Frogs. Baldhead's Frogsister always fed her. She would dip her 
rabbitskin robe in the creek, put a quantity of lice on it, and spread it before 
her sister-in-law. 
One day Ra'tarat's fire went out, and he sent Chickadee to Bald-head's 
house to obtain fresh fire. When he returned with the live coals, he reported 
having seen a woman in Bald-head's house. Ra'tarat then sent the Ha'xhalaxel- 
bird to get more fire, under the pretence that his fire had gone out. When 
he returned, he, also, reported having seen the woman. Then Ra'tarat sent 
the 'kiik-hawk, and Bald-head hid the woman in the rear of the house, and 
sat in front of her; but Hawk's sharp eyes detected her. Ra'tarat now 
believed that a woman was there, and laid plans to get possession of her. 
The Birds were to repair in the evening to Bald-head's house, and some of 
them were to engage Baldhead and his people in a game of lehal, while 
others were to pile wood on the fire, under the pretence of making the place light, until the house became so hot that the woman would have to go out- 
side to cool herself. This was done; and the woman, complaining of the 
heat, went outside, accompanied by her sister-in-law, the Frog. As soon as 
she stepped off the ladder, Ra'tarat pulled her aside. He kicked her escort, 
the Frog, in the face, and knocked her down the ladder. Then the Birds 
ran up the ladder; others deluged the fire with water, in order to create 
confusion, and to prevent Bald-head's people to push them into it. By this 
time, Ra'tarat had conducted the woman to his house.    
Here follows the “Battle of the Birds” related exactly the same as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” xx., commencing at the 17th line, and continuing to the end. 
Just as the several birds painted themselves for battle, thus their colors 
remain at the present day. 
  
+ Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, x. also Ui'mat, p. 243 of this volume; Shuswap, P. 684.

----

346 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
After the death of Bald-head and the resurrection of the other birds by 
Ra'tarat, the woman told the latter that her parents had sent her to marry 
him. For several months she lived with her husband and then told him she 
desired to visit her relatives. 
She started alone on the journey, and had not gone far before she saw 
something like a white stone following her. It rolled over the ground at a rapid pace, and seemed to gain on her. She tried to avoid it by turning 
aside: but it followed her, and drew nearer and nearer. The faster she ran, 
the swifter it rolled. It was the head of Bald-hcaded Eagle, which finally overtook her, and entered her privates. Shortly afterwards she gave birth 
to two small heads, which followed close at her heels; but the large head 
remained inside when she travelled. She came to an open place, saw a band of deer, and said to herself, “If only a man were here to kill these deer for 
me, so that I might have venison to eat!” Immediately Bald-head spoke, 
saying, “I am a man. 1 will kill these deer for you” He came out of the 
woman, rolled along in the grass until he reached the deer, and killed them 
all by entering into them through the anus. Now the girl ran, thinking to 
escape from the pursuing heads. She reached a stream, and crossed on a 
narrow log, thinking the heads would surely tumble off. But they rolled over 
the log without falling off, and, soon caught up with the flecing girl. The 
large one entered her as before, and the small ones followed close behind. 
At last she reached her parents’ house, and her brothers asked her what those things where that always followed her. At first she told them they 
were her little dogs, but afterwards told the whole truth, and how Bald-head 
always remained in her. Then the brothers spoke to the head, saying, “Why 
do you hide? Come out and live like other people. We are your brothers- 
inlaw: why should you fear us?” Bald-head came out of their sister, and 
next day they invited him to sweatbathe with them. They made the stones 
very hot, and all went in together. When they had been in a few minutes, 
they said it was so hot that they must go out and bathe. Then one of them 
sat down at the door of the sweathouse with his back against it; and the 
other one, lifting up the cover of the sweat-house just above the stones, threw 
water on them, which caused so much steam that Baldhcad burst. Then 
they took the small heads, threw them in, and they also burst. Then they 
transformed the heads into bald-headed eagles, saying, “Henceforth you will 
be common cagles, and never again be able to follow people, or enter the 
vaginas of women.” 
67. The Three Owl Sisters. 
Three sisters lived at Kainuten in the Okanagon country. They were 
the A'ent} the Poxpizox? and the Skalu'la® One day when they were 
TR mal Tengen wl TH baring owl. EF Frgm——  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 347 
digging bitter-root, three Thompson-River brothers arrived, and proposed 
marriage to them. These men were the Spats, the J'kiik, and the Ra'fzrat) 
The women accepted them, and forthwith the men built mat lodges to live 
in. When they had finished the lodges, their wives would not. enter them. 
Poxp'xox said, “1 should dic if 1 entered a mat lodge. 1 can live in earth lodges only.” Skalu'la said, *I can only live where there are trees. I should 
die if 1 entered a mat lodge or an earth lodge” ent said, “I can only 
live where bushes arc. If I catered a mat lodge, earth lodge, or skin lodge, 
I should at once die.” The husbands said nothing, although they were very 
much displeased. They set about to crect other lodges to suit their wives. 
One built a small underground house in a sandy place. The second built a 
brush lodge in the forest; and the third erected a lean-to shelter among the 
bushes. The men lived with their wives until cach had given birth to two 
children; but they did not get along together very well. At one time A'enk 
had hurt her foot by running a stick into it, and ever afterwards cried a 
great deal, complaining of the pain, and pretending to be lame. She made 
a great ado, and tried to get her husband to do most of the work. Poxpdxor 
defecated every day at the entrance to the underground house, and thus 
created a stench, which eventually so affected her husband that he died. 
Then the surviving brothers said, “If we live with these women much longer, 
we, also, shall die” Thereupon they returned to their own country, taking 
their brother's body with them. - When they reached home, Ra’tzrat painted 
his face, and jumped over the corpse four times. Thus he resuscitated his 
brother. He scratched his head, and the hair fell out, for he had been dead 
many days. He said, “I must have been asleep a long time.” The men 
were afraid to return for their children. 
Some time after this, Coyote, in his travels through the Okanagon country, 
came to where the three sisters lived. He threw Ant into the bushes and 
transformed her, saying, “You will be the &en owl, and live among bushes. 
You will always cry for your sore foot, and people will think you are lame.” 
He threw Skalu'la among the large trees and transformed her, saying, “You will be the stall owl, and will frighten children by crying near lodges at night” He threw Poxpizox on the ground and transformed her, saying, “You will be the poxpizox owl, and will live in the ground. Your house will always smell of excrement, which will be heaped around the entrance.” 
68. Tci'ne’i's War for the Salmon; or, The Introduction of Salmon. 
The people were living at Klemma’ on the south side of the Columbia River. Fish were very scarce, and consequently the Fish-hawk and many 
+ Three varieties of hawks. 2 Compare Umat, p. 2315 also p. 282 of this volume; also, Introduction of Salmon by the Coyote, Umqg, p. 205; Nicola Valley, pp. 207 et seq.   
44--JESUT NORTH FACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VILL

----

348 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
other birds were very thin. Most of the people were starving, for game was 
scarce also. At that time, salmon seldom visited the interior, and never 
spawned there.  Zcine’i* said, “I will go to the great lake of the west and 
obtain salmon.” He asked the advice of the little Zsokoms/s-fish, who advised 
him not to go, saying, A powerful mystery guards the salmon in the great 
lake. The salmon as well as the lake belong to him. He is of huge size, 
can swim very fast, and has a very large tail. When he opens his mouth, he can swallow the whole earth. You must not try to fight with him, for 
he will surely kill you! Zuni maintained he would- go, nevertheless, as 
the people were starving, and the prize was worth risking his life for. Bor- 
rowing Zsokomi's’ canoe, he embarked with his four sons, and paddled down 
the Columbia River. They met Fish-hawk and asked him to join them. He consented, saying, “There are no fish here. I should like to sec salmon in 
the streams. I will help you to get them.” Soon afterwards they fell in with 
the Raven, who was grumbling because he could not get enough food. They 
asked him to join them, and he consented, saying, “I should like to have 
salmon and their spawn to eat.” Lower down the river, they met Bald-headed 
Eagle, and asked him to join them also; but he refused. So they transformed 
him to the present-day bird of that name, and ordained that he should hence- 
forth live by stealing food from other birds. 
The war-party now consisted of seven. Zi and his sons remained 
in the canoe, while Raven and Fish-hawk acted as scouts, the former flying 
ahead in mid air, and the latter flying still higher up. When they reached 
the mouth of the river, they stopped to consider what to do. They were 
afraid to go on the big lake with the canoe, as it would disturb the waters, 
and thus let the powerful mystery know that they were coming. They 
landed, and sent Fish-hawk out over the lake to seek salmon. He dived, 
and caught two, which he took to his people. Zci*ne'i’s eldest son took them 
and ran up along the bank of the river, crying, *Ba'a, daa,” by striking his 
mouth with his hand. All the salmon left the lake, and commenced to follow 
the sound. Raven flew behind, and drove them. Now the monster that 
owned the salmon came along very fast to attack Zzi*ni. Fish-hawk staid 
behind to meet him. He gained much time for his friends by flying up and 
diving down in front of the enemy, who opened and shut his huge mouth 
vainly, trying to catch him. At last Fish-hawk became tired, flew up stream, 
and caught up with Raven, whom he helped to drive the salmon. Zri*ne’s's 
eldest son still led as before. Now, the monster would have overtaken the 
party, but 7:ine’i and his three sons waited to meet him. Zei'e’é pulled 
the beak off one of his sons, and replaced it with a feather out of his wing, 
which he threw in his son's face, where it became a beak. Then, pulling a 
feather from each of his other sons, he feathered the beak like an arrow. 
Nome of a bind wih & ong beak, 1 think, the sadpipe. 
     

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 349 
It was very sharp. He threw it with great force, and it disappeared entirely 
in the soft flesh of the approaching monster. The latter rolled about, trying 
to rid himself of the arrow; but it was so far in that he had great difficulty 
in getting hold of it. Thus the people gained so much time that the salmon 
were now far up the river. 
The monster however, continued the pursuit, and 7% and his three 
sons stopped again to meet it. They shot arrows, and hurled darts and spears 
at it; but the monster caught all the missiles in its mouth, and then swallowed 
the men and their canoe. This made him heavy, so that he could not swim 
as fast as before. The men could find no way of escape; but at last the 
youngest son found a small hole (the vent of the monster), which he tore open 
Wide enough to squeeze through. The other two brothers, in coming out, 
made the hole still larger, and at last their father, dragged the canoe out, 
and made the hole very large. This killed the monster, who floated 
away dead! 
The birds drove the salmon up to the upper Columbia and into all the 
tributary streams. They kept them there until they had spawned, and then 
allowed them to return to the sea. They took some of the salmon-roe and 
flew to the Nicola, Thompson, Fraser, and other rivers, where they let it drop. 
Thus salmon began to run in these streams also. Ever since, the salmon 
return to their birthplaces to spawn. 7ti'ne’s said, “Henceforth all people of 
the interior will have salmon to eat. Salmon will return to their spawning- 
grounds every year. Salmondry will go to their home in the sea; but they 
will never forget the places where they were hatched. When they are grown, 
they will return and deposit their spawn.” Then 7tis7 transformed Fish- 
hawk into the bird of that name, saying, “Henceforth you will be a fish-hawk, 
and will catch fish by diving from a great height. You will always obtain 
plenty” He also transformed Raven, saying, “Henceforth you will be an 
ordinary raven. When people catch salmon, you will come and eat the refuse. You will always have plenty to cat.” 
Although Zein had introduced salmon into the interior, he was worse 
off than most of the birds, for he was unable to catch them. He tried many 
methods, but all were equally futile. One day, while trying to spear salmon 
with a pole sharpened at the point, Old-One came along, and, pitying him, 
showed him how to make a salmon-spear. He also caused a spafsan-tree to 
grow, stripped off the bark, and showed 7¢i*ne'i first how to make twine, 
and then how to make a dipnet. He said to the spatsan-trec, “Henceforth 
you will grow in this country, for people require your bark.” Afterwards he 
showed the people how to split and dry fish, and how to make fish-caches. 
After this, Zui'nei and his people lived casily; but the people of other 
countries did not know how to make fish spears and nets, and thus were not 
Some vay the water rhed im Trough the Tole and sunk Bo.  

----

350 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
much benefited by the annual salmon-runs. Therefore Zvi*ni and his sons 
made many salmon spears and nets, and sent one of each, with messengers, 
to all the neighboring tribes. Thus the Sahaptin, Kootenai, Thompson, 
Shuswap, and Lillooet people all learncd to fish in the same way as the 
Okanagon, and all the people of the interior became able to catch salmon 
and to live more easily. 
69. War between the Fishes of the Interior and of the Coast. 
All the fishes of the interior gathered in Nicola at the bidding of the 
powerful chief Rainbow Trout (Sema‘esut) and his captain Sematsa’s? who 
requested them to follow them to war, saying, “We will lead you to the 
strange country where dwell many people by the great lake into which the 
large rivers® flow. We will make war on the people, and show them how 
expert we are. We will make ourselves rich with plunder and slaves.” The 
assembled people all agreed, and forthwith commenced to make canoes for 
the journey and to prepare themselves in magic. They also danced war- 
dances many days. When ready, the warriors all embarked in many canoes 
made of bark and of tules. Among them were many who had special magical 
powers of great potency against an enemy; as, for instance, Rainbow Trout, who could turn himself inside out; the Kuwa'ak? who could open his mouth 
so wide that nothing could pass; and the Samatsaz, who could swallow water 
so quickly as to dry up a river in a short time. 
The war-party paddled down the rivers until they came to great mountains 
(the Cascade Range), where the waters were very rough and the country for- 
bidding. Here they called a-halt, and considered the advisability of proceeding. 
Most of the warriors declared for going on; but a few were afraid and pre 
ferred to turn back, saying, “We do not like the looks of the country, nor 
can we sec enough inducement to continue. We are satisfied with our own 
country, where the lakes are small, the hills low, and the streams run smoothly.” 
The rest of the party continued their journey, and the leading canoe reported 
seeing a strange person under water. This was the first being they had come 
across. Rainbow Trout said, *I will kill him,’ and forthwith swallowed the 
person, who proved to be the bait at the end of a hook. Thus he was 
caught and badly wounded in the stomach; but he turned himself inside out, 
and a fish disengaged the hook, and washed the wound. Then he reversed 
himself again, drank much water, and soon became well. They now drew 
near to the mouth of the great river and saw some of the coast people   
1 Compare Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, xsvi, and Utk'mat, p. 231 of this volume; also, Nos. 68, 70 and 71. 1 do not know the English name. 3 The sea is meant. + Most Indians say the Fraser River; but some say it may have been the Columbia. 
   

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 351 
approaching in dug-out canoes made of cedar. They were the Sockeye salmon 
(‘swa'z), King salmon (Kwor'a), and other salmon journeying up stream, and 
as yet quite unaware of the advancing war-party. Now the chief said, *I 
will try them, and, drawing in his breath, the water followed, leaving the 
salmon in their canoes dry. Then he blew out his breath, the water rushed 
back in a great wave and overwhelmed the salmon. 
‘Those who were not drowned fled in great consternation to their powerful 
chief, Sturgeon, who dwelt on the lake-shore near the mouth of the river. 
Now the fishes of the interior halted, for they knew Sturgeon, who was a great 
warrior, would certainly attack them. They painted themselves, and prepared 
for battle. Rainbow Trout put on white paint with a reddish stripe down 
each side. ze¢'kasuf painted himself blackish with red stripes. “Dolly Varden 
Trout” (7suf) put red and black spots all over his body; and thus each 
warrior painted himself in his own particular style. The war-paint put on that 
day became afterwards their natural color when they were transformed into 
fishes: and this is the reason of the different coloring of fishes at the present 
day. The people of the interior now paddled down stream again, and soon 
say Sturgeon and the coast people advancing from the mouth of the river to 
attack them. Now a great battle ensued, the people of the interior were getting 
the better of those of the coast, until Sturgeon attacked them himself, swal- 
lowed many canoes, and killed many people of the interior. When Rainbow 
Trout saw that his men were getting the worst of the battle, he rushed ahead 
to help them. He and Sturgeon seized each other by the snouts, and fought 
like dogs for a long time. Trout now drew in his breath, and Sturgeon’s head 
followed. Continuing to draw in his breath, he gradually swallowed his enemy 
entirely. When the coast people saw their champion was beaten, they fled. 
The men of the interior pursued them; Sematsa’s swallowed up the water and 
made the river run dry, until the enemies stuck fast, or floundered in the mud. 
Kuwa'ak caught many with his great mouth, and “Dolly Varden Trout" crushed 
and ate many of them. Thus very many were slaughtered, and very few 
canoes escaped. Now, Rainbow Trout, after breaking all of Sturgeon’s bones, 
vomited him up: therefore the sturgeon now has but few bones, and they are 
all disconnected. The people of the interior after their victory, proceeded out 
of the mouth of the river and along the shores of the great lake, where they 
came to a large village with many inhabitants. The people were afraid, and 
made friends with them by giving them many presents and numerous slaves. 
The men from the interior lived there for a while, being supplied with women 
and plenty of food. A few of them liked the place, and remained altogether. 
The majority, however, had no liking for the country, nor did they care to 
marry the coast women. They soon returned home, taking with them only 
four women slaves, — zka'kenak, Somad'm, Tcoktctleen, and Ni'mekicen? 
T Speckled or brook trout. TT do not know the English names of soy of these fh  

----

352 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Formerly none of these fish lived inland; and the varieties known by these 
names at the present day are descendants of the four slave women. 
When the returning party commenced to ascend the river, they found 
the poling very hard, therefore they discarded their canoes, and asked an old 
shaman to make a trail for them under the water, which they followed until 
they arrived in Nicola A few of the fishes remained behind at Lytton and 
Spences Bridge, and afterwards some of them settled in other places, according 
to the kinds of country and water that suited them. Thus the large war-party 
broke up, and since then the different varictics of fish have remained in the 
several localities in which they settled. They spread and became numerous 
all over the country, but certain kinds of fish are still found only in particular 
waters and localities. The descendants of the four coast women became 
numerous in the Nicola country. 
70. War of the Nicola Animals and Fraser River Fish. 
The people of Zixt® were invaded by a large war-party of Fish from 
Fraser Rivers They attacked the invaders, however, and drove them back as far as Lytton. They killed many of them along Nicola River, and threw 
their bodies into the stream. Near the mouth of Nicola they overtook the 
Humpback Salmon, and threw his body into the river. Soon afterwards they 
overtook and slew the Sockeye, the King Salmon, and the 75//a,’ and threw 
their bodies into the Thompson River. At Lytton they overtook the Sturgeon, 
who was the war chief, and threw his body into the’ Fraser River. Of all 
the Fish, only the Dog Salmon escaped to tell the tale, and ever since he 
has been afraid to come into the interior. The other Fish returned to the 
rivers into which their bodies were thrown, for the victors ordained this. 
Thus the sturgeon is found in the Fraser River at Lytton, but never ventures 
up the Thompson River; and the sockeye and king salmon run in the Thompson 
River, but never ascend the Nicola. The humpback alone, af all the salmon, 
frequents the latter stream. Humpback Salmon had a son who was a baby when his father was killed. 
When he grew up he trained himself with the object of avenging the slaughter 
of his people. Alone he ventured to Nicola, and took up his abode with 
Badger, who lived at Zixt, and who treated him hospitably. No one knew 
  
+ Some say they asked a shaman from the coust whom they took with them to make a trail for them, and that, when they came to Nicola, they threw him into Nicola Lake, where he was transformed into a “water mystery.” ¥ See Footnote 1, p. 350. Compare Shuswap, Vol. II of this series, p. 669. + For origin of Zuxt people, see story of Quo'qiqwat, p. 316. + Most Tndians agree they were Utmat from the canyon of Fraser River; some say, however, they were from the Lower Fraser River or from the coast * This may be the black spotted trout (Salmo Clarkin.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 353 
who he was. One night he and Badgers son went to the large underground 
house where the people were holding a medicine-dance. Each animal danced 
in turn, and sang his manitousong. When Coyote danced, the weather 
became cold. At last the strange lad danced, and immediately it became dark, and a storm broke with thunder and lightning. The house was struck 
by a bolt and caught fire. Humpback's son ran up the ladder, and pulled 
Badger's son after him through the flames, which soon stopped all cgress. 
Grisly Bear tried to get out, but the flames beat him back. He then hugged 
and bit the posts of the house to break them; but Humpback had made 
them turn like stone, and so Grisly Bear only broke his teeth. Coyote, 
Beaver, and others sang their songs to make ice, snow, rain, and water to 
come; but they and all the other animals were soon burned to death. 
Now, only the Badger and his family, of all the people, were left at Ziixt. 
Humpback said to him, “I have had my revenge, and now return to my 
country; but I will come to visit you every second year, because you have 
been kind to me. Since then the humpback salmon have run up the Nicola 
every second year. On parting, Badger gave Humpback a present of the 
aspen poplar, saying, “These will be your dentalia” Therefore people say, 
that, just before the humpback salmon run, their chief says to the other sal- 
mon, “We go to the interior to see our dentalia.” 
71. The Okanagon Fish People.! 
The Fish people of the interior lived on the banks of a river in the 
Okanagon country at a place called Nkomsi'tuk. From this place the plateau 
runs back from the river valley perfectly flat, but is cut in two by a long. 
and deep dry canyon, with steep rocky sides, which is quite invisible until 
its brink is reached. A large party of warriors from the southeastern extre- 
mity of the Okanagon country, on their way to attack the Shuswap, came 
to this plateau in the daytime, and, as their scouts reported having seen the 
village of the Fish people down in the valley, they made up their minds to 
await darkness and then attack them. They knew nothing of the deep, narrow cut in the plateau, and, when dusk came, they marched out toward 
the Okanagon village. It soon became dark, and, never suspecting any danger, 
they all walked over the edge of the chasm and were dashed to pieces. An 
old man, Bald-headed Eagle, was unable to keep up with the rest, and walked 
with the aid of a staff. Suddenly the point of his staff missed the ground, 
and, thinking there must be a hole ahead, he sat down and waited until 
daybreak, when he saw the remains of his friends lying mangled on the rocks 
below. In the morning some women went to gather service-berrics at the   
* See Footnote 1, p. 3503 I have alio heard a Shuswap tale of a war-party meeting a similar fate. A similar story is told about a blaff in the Chilcotin valley near Crowhurss place. 
 

----

354 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
base of the cliffs in the canyon, and one of them found fat, blood, and pieces 
of flesh on the bowlders of the rock-slide. She called out, “A mountain 
sheep must have fallen here and killed itself” The other women went to 
the place, and began to gather up the meat. At last they came on some 
human heads and hands, etc., and, becoming alarmed, they went home and 
told the men, who searched the place, and found the mangled remains of the 
strange warriors. The rocks were fairly covered with blood, intestines, parts 
of limbs, broken weapons, feathers, and down. By counting the heads, they 
found that the war-party must have been large. All the faces were painted 
half and half in black, white, or red. Now the people were afraid, and said, 
“We must leave this place. It is not safe. War-parties will come some day 
and kill us” All left except the Sucker, who said, “I will stay here. It is 
a fine place, and suits me exactly.” Therefore suckers are numerous at this 
place, and people go there, and kill them in large numbers. The rest of the 
fishes travelled south. Coming to a valley, the ZSokom’s said, “I will stay 
here.” He dammed up the creek, and made a lake, in which he lived. This 
place became known as Koxkoxottce'sxen, and Zsokom/s-fish are now plentiful 
there. The people continued to travel until all had selected suitable abodes, 
except the Ntatcaina-fish, who said, “I will go to the south side of the 
Columbia River, and live there” He settled in a place called Lateus: there- 
fore none of these fish are now found north of Columbia River. Thus the 
Okanagon Fish people all dispersed. The old Bald-headed Eagle returned 
home, and related the fate of his people. 
72a. The Girl and the Dog.! 
This story is told in the same way as in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” p. 62. 
726. The Girl and the Dog.! 
A girl was visited by a young man every night, and at last gave way 
to his importunities. But, although he thus lay with her, she could not find 
out who he was. One night she rubbed red paint on the palms of her hands, 
and, when he lay in her embrace, she pressed her hands firmly on his back. 
The next morning early she went to where the young men played games, 
thinking she would sec the man she had marked, and thus identify him. She 
looked in vain, hower, and at last saw her father's dog with the imprint of 
her hands on his back. Overcome with shame, she went home and refused 
to talk or eat. Soon afterwards she gave birth to two pups, — one male 
    
? Compare Ut'mat, p. 287 of this volume; Traditions of the Thompson River Indias, p. 62; and notes ibid. p. 114; abo L. Farrand, Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians, Vol. IT of this series, p. 7; Cheyenne 1. c. XVIII; known also to the Lillooet.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 355 
and the other female. Her friends and all the people were so ashamed that 
they moved camp to a distant place, and left her to starve. She lived the 
best way she could, and her children grew very fast. Before long she dis- 
covered, that, when she left them to procure food, they took human form, but, as soon as they were aware of her return, they changed back to dogs 
again. Accordingly she prepared some medicine’ with which to transform 
them, and one night approached the lodge unobserved. She peered in, and saw them playing around the fire in human form. They had cast aside their 
outer skins. Now she threw the medicine on them, but it struck the boy 
only; and the girl, rushing to her skin, became a dog again. Soon after 
this the boy commenced to hunt and shoot small game; and his mother told 
him to let the dog follow him, and not to beat it. He did not know that 
the dog was his sister. Wherever he went, she followed him, and, whenever he shot anything, she always ran ahead and devoured it. One day he shot 
a redheaded woodpecker, and the dog ate it before he could reach the spot. He became very angry, and beat her with a stick. Then the dog changed 
into the golden plover (‘skwakw?), ran away and cried, *Kwa Awa, I am your sister: hunt me now.” The lad was now sorry, and followed his sister, imploring her to come back; but she flew away and disappeared. 
73. Grisly Bear's Grandchild; or, Spetlamu’lax.t 
(Nkamtci nemuz.) 
Grisly Bear lived with her daughter, who was a good-looking maiden. No other people lived in the neighborhood. Every morning when the girl 
went to the watering-place to fetch water, she washed herself. Now King 
Salmon® and Humpback Salmon® were brothers, who lived a long distance away in the land of fishes. They said to one another, “Let us go and obtain 
Grisly Bear's daughter for our wife.” They took their canoe, and after a few 
days arrived at the place were the girl bathed. Here they made themselves 
invisible, and waited. 
Soon the girl came down to fetch water. She took off her clothes, and 
swam in the water. Then she came ashore and began to louse her robe. 
While thus engaged, King Salmon asked her what she was doing. She looked 
+ A decoction of herbs. > Compare this story with that of Dawson, in his Notes on the Shuswap People, p. 34, snd with Traditions of the Thompion River Indians, p. 64, Marten and Fisher, p. 77, Tehkrkie, Creation of Coyotes Son 1. 20, 4d ith Shavwap rion of te Gry ar, randki 1. 61. ily Bear is said by some to have had several husbands, whom she got rid of by transferring them to the upper world. «Some say this girl was the daughter of the old man Sperlam'iis; others say Grisly Bear created her in the same manner as Coyote created his son, — first one of clay, then one of gum, then one of stone, aad finally one of wood or bark. The girl was the last one made, and neither water nor sun could affect her + Kuota. © ni.   
  
    45—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

356 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
around, but could not see any one. The Salmon said, “Can't you see us? 
and she answered, “No” Then they made themselves visible, and King Salmon said to her, “I want you to become my wife.” They gave her new 
clothes which they had brought with them. These she put on. They em- barked in the canoe, and she went back with them and becamo King Salmons 
wife, Grisly Bear wondered at her daughter's long absence, and went in 
search of her. When she found her clothes at the water's edge, she concluded 
that her daughter must have been drowned. Henceforth the Grisly Bear's daughter lived with her husband in the land 
of fishes, and in due time gave birth to two children, a son and a daughter, who grew rapidly. The Fish children taunted them, saying, “You have no 
grandmother.” So they asked their mother, who said, “Yes, you have a grandmother; but she lives in my country, which is far distant.” They said, 
“We wish to see our grandmother.” So their mother gave them directions 
how to reach there. They started on their journey by canoe, and in due 
course arrived at their grandmother's house, which they entered. They found 
her absent, but soon discovered her digging roots on a hillside. They played 
in the house, and ate of the food which they found there in great plenty. When they saw Grisly Bear approaching the house, they ran away and hid 
themselves, for they were afraid of the old woman's fierce appearance. On 
entering the house, Grisly Bear saw that some one had been there, for things 
were disarranged and some of the food had been caten. She discovered 
children’s footprints near the fireplace, went out and called on them to come; 
but the boy especially was very much afraid, and ran down to the canoe, in 
which they embarked and returned home. 
When they arrived at home, their mother said, “You cannot have staid 
long with your grandmother.” And the girl answered, “My brother was afraid 
of our grandmother, so we hid when she came home.” Then their mother 
sent them back, telling them not to be afraid, but to wait in the house until 
such time as their grandmother came back from digging roots. She said, 
“Your grandmother will certainly be glad to scc you when you tell her who 
you are.” 
The children returned to their grandmother's house; but again they 
became afraid, and returned home. Thus four times their mother sent them 
to visit their grandmother. . 
When they came the fourth time Grisly Bear was aware of their presence 
and resolved to surprise them. She put her robe and basket on a stump, 
and, keeping herself hidden, she returned unobserved to the house. The 
children mistook the dressed stump for their grandmother and remained in 
the house. Grisly Bear, however, had beforehand prepared some medicine * 
  
tA decoction of herbs.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 357 
in a basket for, the purpose of throwing it over the children to make them 
tame. She looked into the house and saw them playing. The girl was very 
much like her mother in countenance. When the two were close together, 
she threw the medicine at them; but it only fell on the boy, who at once 
assumed human form, while the girl ran away transformed into a dog. 
Now Grisly Bear asked the boy who he was, and he told her the whole 
story. She treated him very kindly, and taught him how to make and use 
bow and arrows, with which he began to shoot chipmunks, squirrels, grouse, 
and woodpeckers. Wherever he went, the dog followed him; but he did not 
know that it was his sister. Whenever he shot anything, the dog would run 
ahead, catch it, and eat it. So he became very much annoyed, and told his 
grandmother of the dog's actions. She said, “Never mind. Let it eat every- 
thing you shoot. Do not be angry with it.” But she never told him that it 
was his sister. One day he shot a willow grouse, and the dog ran ahead 
and ate it. He became angry, and hit the dog severely on the head with 
his arrow. It ran away howling, and said, “Why do you treat me thus? 
1 am your sister, yet you have no pity on me, but try to kill me” Then 
the dog assumed human form? and the lad recognized his sister. He was 
very sorry, and ran after her, wishing to talk kindly to her and to embrace 
her; but she ran away from him. He followed her weeping, and saying, 
“Oh, sister! Oh, my younger sister! Come back, sister! I love you, my 
younger sister!” But she paid no attention, and ran on, while he followed 
her. She ran over plains, then over knolls and hills, then over low mountains 
and high mountains until she reached the clouds. She travelled through cloud 
land until she reached the sky, where she remained. 
Her brother followed her, and at last found himself in the upper world, 
where he scarched for her in vain. One day, while wandering around aim- 
lessly, he happened to see old wood chips. He said to himself, “People 
must live here” As he went on, he saw fresher chips, and stumps of trees 
showing the marks of chisels, and at last he arrived at a place where many people had been encamped. Not far from there he saw a conical lodge, 
  
+ Some add: and to give them human form, for they were half bear, half fh, 2 Some say: its original form, paclly fish, partly bear; otbers say, it became a chickade 3 Some relate this parc of the story differently. They say he followed her a long distance, crying, until she disappeared in the clouds. Then he returned, snd reprosched his grandmother for not telling him that the His grandmother had given him directions that if he shot at & bird on a tree, and the arrow missed its mark and stuck in the tree, he was not to go after it, if it was beyond his reach. One day he fired four arrows at a red-headed woodpecker, and all of them stuck in the trunk of the tree. He thought it was 100 bad to lose so many arrows. He climbed for them, and reached the lower arrow, on which he put his foot, intending to pull out the top arrow frst. As he put out his hand to seize it, he found it suddenly moved beyond his reach. Then he put his foot on the next arrow, but found he still could not reach the (op arrow, which had moved again farther up. Thus he kept on climbing, the arrow going before him, until he reached the sky or uppe world, There he searched for his sister. The rest of the story is the same. It seems that all the arrows kept moving, one always being sbove him, and, the tree continuing to grow, he thus walked on an arrow ladder to the sky.   
    
         
     
   
 

----

358 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
and, on entering, found an old man crouching near the fire in the centre of 
the lodge. He said, “Hallo, Spetlam/liz"* The old man was angry, and 
said, “Why do you address me by that name? The lad answered, “You 
need not be angry. Iam Spetlamu/li_ too. We arc both the same.” He 
related his adventures to the old man, and told him how he came to be there. 
The old man then said, “I am your grandfather, the former husband of 
Grisly Bear; but by her magic she banished me to this country, and I cannot 
return? The people are all out hunting; but cvery four days one of them 
returns and provides me with wood, water, and food.” 
The lad took up his abode with the old man and got wood and water 
for him. On the fourth day one of the people returned to care for the old 
man. The lad concealed himself. When the man saw that the old man had 
as much wood and water as before, he returned and told the people that 
some one must be visiting him. Four days afterwards the man returned again, and found the old man plentifully supplied with wood and water. 
Besides this, new deerskins were spread over the floor of the lodge, and 
much deer-fat was hanging in the lodgeroof. Therefore he determined to 
hide until nightfall. 
The lad had been out hunting. He had killed many deer and came 
back with a heavy load of meat. - Then the man came out of his hiding 
place. The lad cooked meat for him, and he ate. On the following morning 
he returned to the people, carrying two bundles of deer’s fat which the lad 
had given him. He told the people that a good-looking young man, the 
grandson of the old man, had arrived, and that he had been so successful 
hunting that the lodge was full of fat and skins. The people at once broke 
camp and returned home. They wished to marry their daughters to the 
young man, but he refused them all for a long time. At last he married 
onc of their daughters, and she bore him four children. It is said the young 
man never returned to earth.? 
     
74. Skela'una + 
(Zeawazamuz.) 
A giant stole a woman, and took her to his abode many days’ journey 
away. He lived in a large cave at the basc of a cliff, and just outside there was a stump of a large tree which almost concealed the entrance. Within,   
? This name means “weed,” and ia form seems more nearly related to the Shuswap than to the Thompson langusge. The later, however, ive a habit of using Shuswap words in naming mythical objects. 3 Some Indians think that he also reached the sky by following an amow. 3 Some say that this young man was the reeskPil (a vari ade), and that he afterwards returacd to carth, where he continued to wander about searching for his sister, and crying, “Ob, my younger sister!” (Ne Ynt?tcar) and that he was transformed into a chickadee (tcesdhif), aud ordered fo wander around for- ever, crying for his younger sister. 4 Related to the Okanagon word for “grisly bear.” 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 359 
the passage narrowed to a rather small hole, which opened and closed at the 
approach of the giant. Inside of this narrow space the cave became very 
spacious and was of great height. The neighboring country consisted of a 
wooded plateau, with small hills and bluffs here and there. The giant, who 
hunted every day, wore clothes made entirely of grisly-bear skins. 
After some time the captive woman gave birth to a boy, who grew up to be a man of very large stature and of great strength, and who had the 
power of changing himself into the appearance of a grisly bear at will. He 
afterwards travelled over the country, performed many wonderful feats, and had many strange adventures. He was particularly fond of assuming the 
form of a grisly bear and frightening people. When the boy, who was after- 
wards known among the Okanagon as Skeli'una, was able to talk, he asked 
his mother where she came from, for she talked a language different from 
that of his father. When she had told him, he asked her how the outside 
world looked; and she described how fine and beautiful it was The boy 
knew nothing outside of the cave, and so far had never worn any clothes. 
He said to his mother, “Let us go outside and sce the beautiful world 
and she answered, “We cannot; the way out is under control of your father, 
and only at his approach does it open.” On hearing this, he wept, placed 
his head on his knees, and did not talk for a long time. At night, when 
his father came home, the boy asked him for a robe of grisly-bear skin like 
the one the old bear wore. His father gave him a grisly robe of mixed 
colors; but Skela’una was not satisfied, and sat on it. The following night 
he asked again, and his father gave him one of gray color, which did not 
suit him either, and he sat on it. Again he asked for a robe, and his father 
gave him onc of white or silver-tip skins, and he sat on this also. The fourth 
night, when he asked for a robe, his father gave him one of brownish color, like the one he wore himself. This pleased Skela’una, who at once put it on. 
The robe endowed him with magic. 
On the following day, after the giant had gone hunting, he struck the 
door, and it moved. He struck it again, and it opened a little; and when 
he had struck it four times, it opened entirely, and let him and his mother 
pass out. They left the entrance open; then he kicked the huge stump four 
times, and it turned completely over. His mother acted as guide. He carried 
her on his back, travelled rapidly to her country, where he took up his abode 
among her people, and never saw his father again.! 
Skela'una was travelling about in company with three young men as 
companions, and at last came to a place where an old man was living. He 
put on his grisly robe, assumed the form of a bear, and frightened the old 
man, saying he would kill and eat him. The old man said if he would spare   
+ Here my informant said he did not remember the other details of the story, excepting a few of them in a very general way. These are given above.

----

360 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
his life, he would tell him how he could obtain four beautiful young women 
as wives for himself and his companions. He directed him to a hole in the 
ground which led to the underworld, and advised that his companions should let him down in a basket attached to the end of a rope. Here he would 
meet many monsters as he travelled along the trail, cach one in a separate 
house. One was a black monster with hairy body, one had seven heads, one was a snakelike monster, and one had very large eyes. There were four of 
the large-eyed monsters, the last one being exceedingly ferocious, and in his 
house he would find the four beautiful captive girls. 
Skela'una was lowered down by his companions; and after travelling far, 
and overcoming all the monsters in fierce combat, he released the women, 
and took them to the bottom of the shaft. Here he found that the basket 
was too small to contain them all: so, putting the women in it, he tugged at the rope as a signal to his companions, who proceeded to pull it up. The 
latter were surprised when they saw the women, and, thinking Skela‘una 
would claim them all, they proposed to kill him. They lowered the basket 
down again; but Skela’una knew their thoughts, placed a large stone in it, 
and tugged on the rope. When the basket was near the top, they cut the 
rope. The basket and stone fell, plunging out of sight in the earth beneath. 
Skela’una had no means of getting up, and wandered about in a depressed 
mood. After a while he reached a lake, where he saw a Bald-Headed Eagle 
fishing. He was very poor, and his family were starving, for he had fished 
out the lake. Skels'una created many fish for him, caught some, and gave 
them to him. He told the Eagle of his plight, and the latter promised to help 
him as soon as he obtained strength, for he was reduced in flesh by starvation. 
When the Eagle was fat, Skela’una made himself small and light, took four 
fish with him, and sat down on the Eagle's back. The Eagle flew up, but 
was not strong enough, and before reaching the upper world he began to 
fall back. Then Skeli'una fed him a fish. The Eagle gained new strength, 
and flew higher still. Four times he fed the Eagle, who carried him almost 
to the top. Here the Eagle showed signs of weakening; and Skela'una having 
no more food to give him, jumped off from his back and alighted on the 
edge of the hole. Afterwards he started in search of the young women, who, 
being very fleet of foot, had escaped from the three men who wanted to 
make them their wives. After a number of further adventures, Skela'una 
found the four women, who recognized him as their deliverer, and became 
his wives of their own choice.   
  
This story is related to the Spanish tale of Fuan 4/ Oro which is known in Spain and France as well as in America. See Aurelio M. Espinosa, New-Meican Spanish Folklore (Journal of American Folklore, XXIV, 1911) Pp 437, 444; also Franz Boss, Tales from Tehuantepec (J6id. XXV, 1912).

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 361 
75. Muskrat. 
(Vkamtei nemuz.) 
The parents of a pubescent girl who was still living in her hut were 
visited by many men, who offered them presents, and asked for their daughter 
in marriage as soon as her period of training was over. The parents, how- 
ever, refused to accept any of them. Among the rejected suitors ! was Muskrat, 
who was an ugly youth with a big belly. He became angry, and said to 
himself, “I will be avenged on these people.” He shot his supernatural power 
into the girl, and she became sick. She saw a woman going by her lodge 
to fetch water, and upon her return, she threw stones to attract her attention? 
The woman asked her what she wanted, and the girl told her to tell her 
parents that she was sick. Her parents visited her, and asked her what her 
sickness was. She said, *I do not know, but I feel very ill” They carried 
her to their underground house, and engaged shamans to cure her; but they 
failed to effect a cure. While Magpie was in the act of treating her, Muskrat, 
who was sitting near by, began to sing to himself in a low voice, saying, 
“Try your best to cure her, shaman; but you do not know what is the matter 
with her” Then he said, “Oh! I did not mean to say that” Continuing he 
sang, “Try your best, Magpie, you may succeed, but I am afraid you cannot, for 1 shot her” Then he said, “Oh! I made a mistake in talking,’ and 
laughed. Now the people said, “Muskrat must have done something to the girl. Let him treat her” Muskrat said, “I will treat her, if you put her 
back into her lodge.” The people did this, and Muskrat entered and began 
to sing a medicine song. Now he stopped singing, and had connection with 
the girl. Then he sang another song, and came out. When he arrived at 
the underground house, he said to her parents, I have cured your daughter with two songs. The other shamans sang many songs, and could not cure 
her” The girl got quite well, but some time afterwards was discovered to 
be pregnant. The parents asked her who the father of her child was, and 
she answered, “He who treated me and made me well” When her child 
was born, the people threw the young woman, Muskrat, and the child into 
the water, and transformed them into muskrats like those we see at the present 
day. They said, “You will henceforth be muskrats, and live together in water 
and in swamps.   
1 Some say several of the suitors tried to seduce the girl, but failed. * This was a custom. A girl when living spart was not allowed to speak first 1o any one. If she saw people passing, and wished to speak, she threw stones on the trail in front of them. Then the passer-by stopped, and asked what she wanted. She did not show herself, but threw the stones and spoke without leaving. the lodge. 3 Some say he said, *1 had sexual fotercourse with her.”   

----

362 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
76. Muskrat! 
Muskrat was in love with a pubescent girl. She knew that he was in love with her, but did not know that he was watching her constantly. Every 
morning when she went to wash at the spring, she sang, “Oh! I do not like 
Muskrat. Oh, 1 cannot bear him! with his big belly and his small eyes.” 
Muskrat heard her, and became angry, saying, “She insults me. 1 will kill 
her. If 1 cannot get her, no one else shall, either” He made many arrows 
of different kinds, and many moccasins of different shapes and sizes; then 
one night he killed the girl in her lodge, shooting arrows all through the 
tent, and making tracks all around with the moccasins. After destroying the 
moccasins, he walked home and went to bed. 
In the morning the people found the girl dead, and, taking her body 
into the underground house, they tried to bring her to life again. The Otter, 
Marten, Fisher, and Grisly Bear treated her, but without result. 
Then the people asked Muskrat, for he was then training to become a shaman. He treated her, and, while singing his song, sometimes forgot him- 
self, and put in the words, “I did it;" but, at once checking himself, he would 
resume his song. The people said, “He must be the murderers’ attacked him with clubs, and they knocked him down. With each blow the water rose higher in the underground house, and Muskrat would dive to avoid the blows. At last all the people were drowned, and Muskrat, leaving the place, settled in another part of the country. 
77. Elk? 
(Nkamtci nemuz.) 
Elk and his mother lived together in a country away to the southeast. No other people lived in that neighborhood. One day Elk said to his mother, “I wish to have a wife” His mother answered, *Why do you speak so? Don’t you know how ugly you are? No woman would have you, because of your large antlers” Then he said, “I will search for a wife. I will steal one. Make me a woman's kilt, belt, shoes, and robe.” His mother made these things of buckskin and gave them to her son, who then departed to search for a wife. 
After about ten day's travel, he arrived at the mountains near Spences Bridge, where some people were living close to a lake. A young woman ® from one of the lodges came down to the lake to fetch water. When he saw her   
1 Compare with No. 75, also with Shuswap, p. 679. # Compare latter part with Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, p. 35. 3 She was the daughter of Coyote.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 363 
coming, he went some distance out into the lake and changed himself into 
a dead tree with branches above water) The girl saw the dead tree, and 
said to herself, It is warm to-day. I will swim out and sit on these branches.” 
She put down her buckets, and, divesting herself of her clothes, swam out and sat on the branches. Soon they commenced to move, but she thought 
it was only the motion of the water. Then she noticed that they gradually 
approached the shore, and emerged more and more from the water. She 
became afraid and tried to jump off, but found that she was held fast. 
When nearly out of the water, Elk changed back to his natural form, and 
the woman found herself sitting between his antlers. Now he ran as fast as 
he could toward his mother's house. After a while the girl felt cold, and said to herself, I shall perish of 
cold” Elk knew her thoughts, and said, “Here are some clothes: put them 
on” He gave her a robe, and she wrapped it round her body. Soon she 
said to herself, “My feet are cold;” and the Elk gave her moccasins to put 
on. After running fast a day and a night, Elk began to slacken his pace. 
Now the woman said to herself, *I will leave him: so she broke off 
fir-branches as they passed along through the trees. These she placed on 
EIK's head, between his antlers. When she had thus disposed of a sufficient 
number of branches, she caught hold of the limb of a tree as they passed 
underneath, and swung herself up. Elk passed on, thinking that the girl was 
still there, for he felt the weight of the fir-branches between his antlers. 
At last he reached his mother’s house, and cried, “Mother, come out 
and receive your daughterinlaw.” She came and said, “I see no one.” Elk 
answered sharply, “Don’t you see her? She is sitting between my antlers. 
Quick! Lift her off” His mother said, “There is nothing there but a heap 
of fir-branches,” at the same time lifting them off. 
Now Elk knew that the girl had left him, so he at once started back in pursuit. The girl was very fleet of foot, and had made good use of her 
time. Elk ran back a long distance and almost overtook the girl, but was 
not aware that he was so near to her. She stopped to urinate, and then 
ran on. She had just disappeared when Elk came to the place, and, seeing 
where she had urinated, he stopped and urinated on the same spot. He said 
to himself, I have run a long distance and am now tired, and I scem to 
be no nearer to the girl. I will return.’ So he gave up the chase, and went 
back to his mother. 
As soon as the Elk urinated over the urine of the girl, she became 
pregnant. She said to herself, I had no connection with the Elk, and yet 
I find myself with child” Before she went much farther, she gave birth to 
a child, which resembled Elk very much. She washed it, and would have   
Some say he waded out nil only his antlers and nose appeared above water, ad the girl thought hi antlers were the branches of 8 dead tre in the water. 
46—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED,, VOL. VIL.

----

364 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
carried it, but it was so heavy that she could not lift it. Then she said to herself, “I shall have to leave my child. I must hurry on, for Elk may 
overtake me.” So she walked away. 
She had not gone very far when the child cried, “Come back! Why do you leave me? People do not desert their children.” She went back and 
tried again to lift it, but could not do so. Again she left it, and was called 
back by the child. This happened four times. As she was leaving it the 
fourth time, the child was strong enough to get up and follow her. Now 
they journeyed together, and the child grew strong and large very rapidly. 
After travelling some distance, they lost their way, but finally, came 
upon a trail, which they followed. After some time they arrived at a house 
that was inhabited by the four Lice women, who lived on people. Human 
bones were scattered all around. The Lice women seized them, and put them 
in a house in which they had previously made a fire. The house was of 
logs, built closely together, and covered with earth. The Lice put wet wood 
and boughs on the fire, to make it smoke, and locked them in after closing 
up all the chinks in the walls. They would have suffocated, but the woman 
drew the smoke up her nostrils, and they remained unharmed. The Lice 
waited until they thought their victims were dead, then they went in and 
built a large fire. When the fire had burned down, they took what appeared to be the 
dead bodies of the woman and her son, and put them in the ashes to bake. 
Then they built a fire on top of them, and went out. But the woman and 
her son went into a clamshell which they had picked up on the shore of a 
lake that they had passed the previous day, and remained unharmed. Four 
times the Lice came in and built up the fire. After they had done so the 
fourth time, the boy urinated on the fire and put it out. Then he urinated 
at the house, thus making a hole ® through it; and the stream of urine stood 
like a rainbow from the inside to a place far off outside the house. He and 
his mother ran along it, and thus escaped. 
About midnight the Lice said, “They will be ready to eat now. Let 
us look at them” They went in and found the fireplace wet. They scraped 
the ashes and found nothing but an empty clamshell. Now they saw the 
hole in the house, and knew that their victims had escaped. They started 
in pursuit, and overtook them on a large open prairie. 
When the woman saw the Lice coming, she plucked four hairs from her 
privates, and threw them on the ground. They were transformed into four 
trees, in one of which they took refuge. The Lice arrived, and began to 
gnaw the tree down. When it was about to fall, they swung themselves into 
the branches of another one. At last they were forced to take refuge in the 
fourth and last tree. The Lice gnawed it also, and would soon have cut it 
Some ay through the wall; them, through the ot  

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 365 
down; but the woman called on her father, Coyote, for help; and he let 
loose his two large and fierce dogs, — Grisly Bear and Rattlesnake, — who 
ran to the woman's help. Meanwhile the boy had urinated down the tree, 
thus rendering the wood pithy; and the Lice were not able to gnaw it so 
fast. Just as the trec was about to fall, the two dogs arrived, and quickly killed the four Lice women. 
The woman and her child returned with the dogs and reached Coyote's 
house without further mishap. Her parents and the other people had thought 
her drowned, because they had found her clothes and buckets on the lake- 
shore. They welcomed her back. The boy grew up to be a man of very 
large stature and a great hunter and warrior. He was known as EIK’s son. 
78. Turtle and Grisly Bear. 
Turtle made fun of Grisly Bear, and called him names, such as Big 
Teeth, Hairy Legs, Fat Buttocks. Grisly Bear became angry, seized Turtle, 
and tried to bite him; but his teeth could not pierce Turtle’s hard shell, so he threw him down again. When he was about to depart, Turtle would call 
him names again, and Grisly Bear, in a rage, would seize him, and try to 
kill him by squeezing and biting him. At last, after many vain attempts, Grisly Bear had to leave him alone. 
79a. Xo'lakwa'xa,} or Adqux? 
An old woman? lived with the people. She took a desire to eat their 
hearts, and picked up four pieces of gritstone on the mountain to sharpen 
her legs with. She always sat in a corner of the house, keeping her legs 
covered and out of sight while she ground them. The people noticed her 
always grinding under the blanket, and asked her what she was doing. She 
answered, “I am scratching my legs.” The children said to her, *Grandmother, 
why do you always scratch your legs?” and she told them she did so because 
they were very itchy. They said, “We will scratch them for you, grand- 
mother; but she answered, “Oh, no! you will scratch too hard.” They said, 
“You ought to use a wooden scratcher, grandmother: these stones are too 
hard.” But she told them stone was best. Thus she filed her leg-bones until 
    
+ Name of the woman, which is derived from sol (“to §le”) and choos (“leg”). She sang, Sxl, ol abd'sa” as she fled her leg, 2 The story and woman are also so called because she always cried, *ATpus” as she went aloog. The word. seems to have no meaning, For first part of thi story, compre Uma, p. 269 of this volume; Cheyenne, ail, and story of Aa, xxix., Traditions of the Thompson River Indians; for the later part, compare Uma, P. 221 of this volume; Shuswap, p. 650; and Nicola story of Rattlcsoake Womas, p. 339 of this volume; also keown to the Lillooet, 3 Some tell the first part of the story by itself.

----

366 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
they had fine points like awls. One night, when the people were asleep, she 
left the house to try her legs. When she walked gently, they made such 
small holes that her tracks were not noticeable. When she stamped hard on 
clay, they went in to the knee. She tried them on small trees, and they 
went right through the wood. She tried them on a large tree, and they 
went in so far that they stuck, and it was almost daybreak before she was 
enable to disengage herself. The following night, while the people were 
asleep, she arose and pierced all the adults through the neck and all the 
children through the belly, thus killing them. After cutting out and eating 
all their hearts, she wrapped dried grass and skin around the points of her 
legs, put on moccasins, and went to the nearest lodges, calling, *Azguz" as 
she went along. 
It was now morning, and the people heard her coming. As she entered 
the house, they said, “The old woman must want bait (@gwan)’;" and they 
offered her some; but she refused it. After leaving the house, she shouted 
again “Aa’guz’ as before. The people said, “The old woman must be 
crazy! She calls for bait, but, when some is offered to her, she refuses to 
take it.” 
Xo'lakwa'za went on, intending to reach a certain underground house, 
and to kill the people that night. Meanwhile Coyote, Fox, Wolf, and Lynx 
had discovered the murdered people, and started in pursuit of the old woman. 
They tracked her to where she had visited the lodges, and the people told 
them she had been there. When Xo'/akwa’za knew that she was pursued, 
she took off her moccasins, and walked on the points of her legs. As they 
made little pricks only in the ground, she thought her pursuers would be 
unable to track her. But in this she was mistaken; for the men following 
her were among the best trackers of the ancients, and they soon gained on 
her. When she saw that she would be overtaken, she lay down on a flat 
rock, stuck her legs up in the air, and, exposing her privates, waited for her 
pursuers to come. When they drew near, she said to them, “I want a man. 
Come here and have connection with me.” She intended to kill them. They 
answered, ‘We will satisfy you. Have patience.” Fox said, *I do not like 
those awl-pointed legs of hers: she may pierce us with them.” Wolf said, 
“I am not afraid: I will go first.” Coyote said, “That is Xo'/akwa'xa; she 
intends to kill us. The danger is not with her legs, but with her privates, 
which bite and are poisonous, like the head of a rattlesnake. With them 
she intends to kill us. I will go first as I am the most knowing one.” He 
sharpened a short stick at both ends, went up to the woman, and, when she 
tried to bite off his privates with hers, he placed the stick so that they could 
not shut. Now the others also had connection with her, and, when they were 
  
1 “Bait for fishes” The people thought she said ths.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 367 
through, Coyote" transformed her into stone, saying, “You will henceforth be a stone, and you and this place will be called NViaxwr'Z! You will remain 
with your privates open.” 
796. Xolakwa'xa (Another Version). 
Xolakwa'za was an old man who sharpened one of his legs to a point. 
He used it as an awl, and bored skin and wood, with it. He also amused 
himself by seeing how far he could stick it into earth and trees. When the 
point became dull, he filed it with a stone, singing, “File, file, leg!” (x04, 
Fol, akwa'zal) as he did so. One night he took a desire to try his leg on 
people, and, after making it very sharp, he arose while the people slept, and 
pierced all their hearts. On the following morning some men pursued him, 
and, when he saw that he was almost overtaken, he hurriedly jumped into 
a tree to conceal himself. His leg went in so far that he could not pull it 
out again, and it stuck there. His pursuers found him sticking in the tree, 
and killed him with arrows. The birds ate his body, and at last his bones 
fell down. 
80. The One Gummed (Ar&Isatem). 
This story * with the following additions is the same as that of the “Bad Boy,” in the “Traditions of the Thompson River Indians,” vil, pp. 51, 52: — 1. The people got the other boys to induce Bad-boy to go with them to the forest, and there play a game of gumming one anothers eyes. They filled Bad-boy's eyes with gum, and then left him. 2. Bad-boy found that the whistling proceeded from the excrements, urine, and saliva of the other boys. This made him disgusted, and he returned home. 3. The four blankets were of Blue Jay, Magpie, Rat, and Mouse skins respectively. 4. The Sun gave the lad four things — a gun, gunpowder, ball, and shot — in exchange for the blankets. He said, “Henceforth you will kill many deer, elk, sheep, goats, black bears, and grisly bears.” 
81. Ntsike'psatem.* 
A man who had a poor reputation wished to marry a certain girl. The 
people were all averse to the match; but the girl, unknown to them, allowed 
the man to have connection with her. When they discovered the girl to be   
  1 From 443 “placed or placed up” and 2 or - in the Thompson Valley, and 4 stone is pointed out there which are sid to be the woman's legs. 2 Compare with other versions of Xo'labwa'sa, p. 365. 3 Compare Shuswap, pp. 709, 710; also Uma, p. 230 of this volume. 4 Means, “they finished his neck.” The application of the tlle to the story is not very clear. Perhaps ot regarding the mas's neck is omitted. Compare the latter part with Traditions of the Thompson River Indiacs, pp. 26, 52, aad Cheyeape Tales, 1. <., p. 185. “woman's privates.” This place is near Dryaoch h 5 wide crack in it and two needle-like pinnacles, 
    

----

368 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
pregnant, they stripped her and her lover naked, took all their belongings, 
and deserted them. The couple were thus left without food, clothing, weapons, 
or tools of any kind. They searched in the cellars, but found most of them 
entirely empty. A few people who had pitied them had left a few bones 
and bits of dried fish, and one with more pity than the others had left a 
dried salmon. The couple made clothes of sagebark, and what tools they required. The man made a bow and arrows, but they were very inferior; 
and, although he hunted much, he was unable to kill any large game. They 
lived principally on what small animals and birds they could snare. 
One day, as the man approached the lodge after an unsuccessful hunt, 
he heard his child crying and its mother saying, “Do not cry. Soon your 
father will return with much fat for you to eat” The man was sorrowful 
when he heard this, and, instead of entering the lodge, he retraced his steps 
to the mountains. He felt like committing suicide, and lay down on his face 
to cry and think. 
As he was thus lying, Wolf, Marten, Wolvercne, and other hunters came 
along. They were strangers. One of them saw him lying there, and called 
out to the others, “Come here and see this funny man lying naked with his 
backside exposed. His inside is visible through his anus. Let us set fire to 
him and burn out his inside.” They prepared a fire, and were about to light it, when the man arose and said, “Friends, why do you play tricks on me? 
1 am poor and miserable” He told them his whole story, and they pitied him. Their chief, Wolf, said, “Let each of us give him an arrow.” He gave 
the first one himself, and the others followed suit. He said, “These are 
proper hunting arrows, and have magical power over game when used properly. You must go on from here until you reach a large gulch, which, as you will 
sec, should be a very fine haunt for game. Although you may not see any 
thing, you must shoot the Wolf arrow across the gulch, and, when you go 
over to pick it up, you will find it has passed through the bodies of four 
deer, one after another. You will find it sticking in the body of the farthest 
one. You must pull it out, wipe it carefully, and place it back in your quiver. 
If you do this, you will always have good luck in hunting” The man did 
as directed, and killed four deer. He was overjoyed. He cut out some of 
the fat, hurried home to his wife and child. After this he was successful in 
hunting, and killed very many deer and other game. Now his wife, child, 
and he himself could wear clothes of very fine buckskin. They dried so much 
meat and fat that they hardly knew what to do with it. 
They filled the cellars of those people who had pitied them with dried 
meat and skins. The cellar of the person who had left them the dried salmon, 
they filled with marrow and the choicest fat, meat, and skins; but the cellars 
of Coyote, Raven, Crow, and Magpie, who had left them nothing, they filled 
with hoofs, ears, and hair.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 369 
Now the people who had left them could find no game, and were starving. 
Magpie returned to the village, thinking he might find some refuse there to 
cat. He was surprised when he discovered the man and woman alive, and 
living in great abundance. The woman fed him, and gave him some fat to 
take back to his children. He rolled it im moss, and fed his children after 
he got back. They were so eager to eat, and so hungry, that they quarreled 
over the food, and made a good deal of noise. Raven heard this, and thought the children must be eating something good. He hurried to the scene; but 
Magpie heard him coming, and pretended to be roasting moss. He said, I 
am feeding my children with roasted moss;” but Raven thought they would 
not quarrel for moss, and did not believe him. Again he fed them some 
fat, and the children made a noise as before. Raven jumped in suddenly, seized one by the throat, and made him disgorge what he had caten. He 
discovered that it was fat. Now Magpie asked him not to let it be known, 
and told him how he had obtained it. Raven went to the old village. When he saw the child playing with a ball of fat which he was rolling backward 
and forward, he seized it, broke it in two, and ate it. The little boy cried, 
and his mother threw hot greasy water on Raven. The grease stiffened all over him, so that he looked very funny. She was angry, and scolded Raven, 
saying, “Why do you break the child's toy? If you had asked for food, 1 
should have given you some.” She added “Come here, I will feed you.” 
Then she threw Raven into his own cellar, and asked him to eat. Finding 
nothing but hoofs and ears, he flew off with some, and that night singed them 
for his children. The people smelled the burning hair, and discovered him 
feeding his children. He told them the whole story, and the people at once 
made up their minds to return to the village. When they reached there, 
Coyote tried to take possession of the cellar with marrow in it, saying it was 
his; but the owner drove him away. Then he tried to claim, one by one, 
the cellars with fat in them; but the people pushed him away, and at last 
threw him into his own cellar, which contained only hoofs and hair. 
82. The “sa’tuen and the Cloud-Women.! 
The ‘satuen lived with an old man, who told him never to enter a 
certain clump of trees. He often wondered why the old man had told him 
this, and one day determined to try and find out. Entering the grove, he 
discovered a small lake on the surface of which floated much down. This 
made him wonder still more, and he determined to visit the place again next 
day. On the following morning he returned to the same spot and sat down. 
He heard music up in the sky, hid himself and watched. The music kept   
+ Compare Hill-Tout, p. 77.

----

370 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
floating up and down, but at last came nearer, and a woman appeared playing 
a flute. She alighted on the edge of the lake, took off her clothes, and 
bathed in the water. After she had finished, she put her clothes on again, 
played her flute and ascended through the air. Soon another girl came and 
did the same, and then still another one. Then a fourth girl came, who was 
younger and more beautiful than the others. When she was in the water, 
“sa/tuen jumped out and sat on her clothes. The girl was ashamed, and sat 
down in the water. At last she said, “You have seen me naked, and you 
must marry me” He answered, Yes, I will marry you, for I like you” He 
gave her back her clothes, and she dressed. Now she said to “sa’usn, “1 
belong to the clouds, and am the youngest of four sisters. You saw the 
nakedness of my sisters, and you must marry them also.” The man agreed. 
The girl told him to take hold of her belt; she played her flute, and at once 
they began to move upwards through the air. She kept on playing until they 
reached Cloudland. Here %sa’fuen lived with the four sisters, and had many 
children. After staying there a long time, the cloud became too small for 
the number of its inhabitants. ‘sa’fuen said there was more room on earth, 
and it would be better to move there. They played their flutes, and returned 
to the earth, where they took up their abode near the little lake where the 
women used to bathe. After his return to earth, “sa’fuen had many more 
children from his four wives.

----

V. — HERO TALES. 
83. The Man who lived with the Eagles.! 
(Nkamtci'nemuz.) 
A long time ago, there lived among the Nkamicinzmux two men who 
had always been fast friends. One of them married a young woman who 
was also loved by his friend. The rejected lover was very jealous, although 
he seemed to act toward his friend in the same manner a he had always 
done. Some months after the marriage, he said to him one morning, *I know 
where there is an eagles nest. Let us go and take the young eagles. I have 
got a good rope to assist us.” They took their weapons and departed. The 
people did not know whither they intended to gos but they held no suspicions, 
as the two young men had always been accustomed to go together on hunts 
and other expeditions. The unmarried man led his friend to the top of the 
cliff Spithwa'uz? and pointed out to him below an eagle's nest with young 
ones. He said, “I will lower you down with the rope, and help you up again. 
I do not care to go down myself, as 1 might get dizzy.” His friend assented 
and climbed down the cliff, being held by the rope the upper end of which 
was wound around a small tree. When he reached the ledge on which the 
nest was situated, the other man pulled up the rope, and left him to his fate. 
After destroying his friend's weapons, he went home at dark, and pretended 
to wonder that his companion had not arrived. He told the people that they 
had hunted in a certain part of the country, (pointing in a direction opposite 
to that of the cliff), and at noon had separated to return home. 
When several days had elapsed, and the young hunter had not returned, 
the people searched for him. Since they could not find any trace of him, 
they thought he must be dead, perhaps eaten by bears, and gave up looking 
for him. Now the man paid much attention to his friend's wife, and, before the 
usual time for her period of widowhood had expired, he married her. He 
thought his friend must have died, but in this he was mistaken. When the 
old eagles arrived at the nest, they attacked the mans but he made friends with them, and gradually they became accustomed to his company. He lived   
    + Compare Cheyenae, 1 c, xxvii + This is the name of # high perpendicular cif of limestone siusted on the south side of the canyon of the Three Sister Valley, bout eight mle northwest of the Tompson River, snd about eighteen miles fom Speoces Bridge by tral. 
[371] 47JRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VILL

----

372 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
on part of the food they brought each day to feed the caglets. There was 
room enough on the ledge for him to lie down, and he sucked the water that oozed over the surface of the cliff He also got some water which 
collected in holes in the shelf of rock. Thus he lived until the eaglets were 
ready to fly. Then, one morning, he cut up his buckskin clothes and made 
strings with which he tied the two young eagles to his ankles and the old cagles one to each arm. After asking their assistance, he flung himself off 
the cliff. The eagles all flew straight across the narrow valley in a descending 
line, and lighted on the opposite hillside called 7zexpaank! Now he cut 
loose the strings, pulled out four feathers from each of the eagle's tails, and 
bade them good-by, thanking them for keeping and preserving him. He put 
the eagles’ feathers on his head, went into the bush and made a bow and arrows. When he returned home, he found his false friend living with his 
wife, and killed him. He became a noted shaman and great warrior. The 
golden eagle was his guardian. 
84. The Snake-Lover;® or, the Woman and the Snake Mystery. 
A man's wife always went to dig roots near a certain lake. She constantly 
complained of being sick, and therefore unable to dig many roots. Her hus- 
band became suspicious, thinking she only feigned sickness, and that there 
was another cause for her bringing home so few roots. One morning he 
went hunting very early, and hid himself among the roots of the tree near 
the lake. Soon his wife appeared walking quite sprightly. When she had 
reached the lakeshore, she divested herself of her clothes, and bathed. As 
soon as the water was disturbed, a large snake arose out of the middle of 
the lake. She called him, and he came ashore. When he reached the land, 
he became a man, and had connection with the woman. They lay in one 
another's arms all day. At sundown the man entered the water and became 
a snake again. The woman clad herself, dug a few roots and went home. 
‘When she got near the house, she pretended to be sick, tired, and lame. 
On the following morning the husband told his wife to stay at home, as 
she was too sick to dig roots. He sharpened his large knife, dressed his hair 
like his wife, went to the lake, and called the snake as his wife had done. 
It came ashore and wished to have connection with him, thinking he was the 
woman. He stabbed it with his large knife, and cut it to pieces. Cutting 
off the privates, he took them home and cooked them for his wife. When 
she saw what he offered her to eat, she fainted. Then he killed her with 
the same knife.   
1 The name of a long sloping hillside covered with grass and scattering trees, on the opposite side of the, Three Sister Valley, facing Spickua'us. # Compare Shuswap, p. 725; Lillooet; Cheyenne, Lc, p. 185, and Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, xxi.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 373 
85. The Brother who went to the Underground World.! 
A brother lived with his two sisters, and they had a little dog. Every 
morning he bathed in the creck at the same spot, and used a fresh fir-branch 
each time for a sponge. He told his sisters never to go to his bathing-place; 
but, because he told them this, their curiosity was aroused, and they went. 
There they discovered an immense pile of the fir-branches which their brother 
had used; and the needles which had rubbed off from them and fallen in the creek had all changed into dentalia. These they gathered up, and went home 
highly delighted. 
Now, their brother had known at once when they disobeyed him, and 
was angry, because women, by going to his bathing-place, would spoil it for 
training. He made up his mind to desert his sisters, and descended to the 
under world through the floor of the underground house. The girls waited 
in vain for him to return, and at last, believing that he had deserted them 
for their disobedience, they commenced to cry. 
Now, the little dog scratched continually at the bottom of the fire:stone 
which guarded the foot of the ladder, and at last the sisters lifted the stone 
away to find out what the dog wanted. Then they saw a hole through which 
they could look right down into the lower world. They saw the people 
playing a ball game} and their brother was among them. They began to 
weep, and some of their tears fell on his hands. He said, “It docs not rain 
here, and yet drops fell on my hands” Looking up, he saw his sisters 
weeping, and said to them, “Come down here and join me. This is a fine 
country: there is neither rain nor snow, nor heat nor cold. Neither do we 
have to hunt or work, but can spend all our time playing.” His sisters were 
afraid to go down, however: so he took pity on them, and returned to the 
earth and lived with them as before. 
86. Tsowa'wus.® 
Tsowi'wus ¢ was a small, shapeless man, all covered with running sores. 
His eyes and nose, also, ran matter. He lived alone, and all the people 
looked upon him with disgust. Among the people was a beautiful girl who 
had rejected all ®he young men of the place, Her relatives became angry 
with her, and said, “You have refused all the best young men of the place. 
We know not who your husband will be, except it is Tsowi'wus.” She 
answered, “Yes, I will marry Tsowd'wus;” and, taking an old dingy basket   
    P. 313 of his volume, also Traditions of the Thompson River Jadians, xxvii. 2 Like lacrosse. . 3 Compare Chilcotin, 1. c., xxil., Umqt , p. 265; also Cheyenne, 1. ©, p. 171. + Scabby face, or face with sores, or sore eyes.

----

374 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
with a dirty bark tumpline, she went for. her husband, and carried him to 
the house. All the people laughed when she emptied him out of the basket 
and made up their nuptial bed. When night came, she was surprised to find 
that Tsowd'wus had discarded his scabby skin, and now lay beside her in the form of a handsome man with hair as bright as sunshine, and skin as smooth 
as ice. He was so white and pure that his heart was almost visible. His body 
was covered with dentalia and crosses of gold. From each ear was suspended 
a star of gold. The girl was so overjoyed, that she aroused her parents, 
and asked them to feel of their son-inlaw. 
On the following morning the men laughed much, and said, “Oh! let 
our new somindlaw come with us to hunt. He must kill game for us. To- 
morrow we will hunt” The girl answered, “Yes, Tsowd'wus will hunt with 
you to-morrow. I will make snow-shoes for him. He will kill game for you.” 
Every one laughed at the idea of Tsdwi'wus hunting, and using snow-shoes. 
The following morning carly the hunters started, the girl following close behind, 
carrying her husband in a basket. When they got high up in the mountains, 
they made ready to hunt, and put on their snow-shoes. The girl said, “You 
go ahead. It will take me some time to put on my husband's snow-shoes, 
and 1 shall have to help him to walk. We shall have to go slowly, and it 
will only delay you” When the hunters were out of sight, TsowA'wus came 
out of his cover, and, fastening on his snow-shoes, ran around to get ahead 
of the others. He made a dense fog, so that the hunters could not see, then, 
rounding up the deer from a large tract of country, he headed them for the 
place where he had left his wife. Running fast, he overtook one deer after 
another, and left dead deer along his track as far as the place where his wife 
was. Returning, he entered his scabby skin, and his wife placed him in the 
basket. The hunters, being unable to find any deer, also returned. On the 
way back, the fog lified and they saw Tsdwi'wus’ track with the carcasses 
of deer strung along it. They were surprised at the great jumps, and wondered 
“who could have killed the deer. They tried all their snow-shoes in the tracks, but none would fit, for the tracks had been made by snow-shoes of different 
shape and size from theirs. Coyotes snow-shoes were’ the nearest, and he 
claimed the deer. They found the tracks led to where Tsowd'wus and his 
wife were, and they asked the latter if she knew who made them. As she 
did not answer, they took Tsowi‘wus' snow-shoes, and measured them in the tracks, finding they fitted exactly. This made them wonder much. That 
night Tsow'wus discarded his scabby skin, and asked his wife to throw it into 
the river. Next morning they slept late, and the people, gathering in the 
house, laughed much, saying, “Our son-in-law is such a good worker! He 
must get us some firewood” The wife threw off their blanket, and arose, 
her husband following her. The people were surprised to see such a hand- 
some man, and could hardly believe he was Tsowa'wus. The girl stroked

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 375 
her husband's long glittering hair, and with each touch the light from it shone 
so bright as to dazzle the eyes of the spectators. All the women now envied 
the girl. Tséwd'wus went out for firewood, and, kicking down a large dry tree, 
he put all of it in his mitten and carried it home. When he emptied it out, 
the wood assumed its original proportions, and formed a large pile. Then, 
going after the deer he had killed the previous day, he gathered all the 
carcasses together, and, putting them all into his mittens, he carried them 
home. When he emptied his mittens, the carcasses assumed their natural 
proportions, and were so many that the people had meat for all winter, 
Tsowa'wus and his wife lived very happily together, and had several children. 
87. Alar! 
(Nkamtei' nemuz.) 
There were four winter houses together near Lytton. In one of them 
dwelt two brothers who had never trained, and had no guardian spirits. All 
the young men delighted in playing lehal and other games with the brothers, 
for the latter were always losers. Every evening they gambled with them, 
and invariably won, until at last the brothers and their parents were left almost naked. 
One night, after losing, the elder brother put his face between his knees, 
and was very sorrowful. His parents were angry because he had gambled away their clothes; and his mother, who had only a breech-clout left, took 
it off, threw it over his neck, and asked him to gamble it away also. He 
was ashamed, and sat without moving until past midnight. Then he went to 
where his younger brother slept, and asked him to come along. They took with them some mats and a fire-drill, and made their way to Zrofcowd'uz 
Creek? near the head waters of which they halted, in a place where many 
fir and balsam trees grew. Here they built a large sweat-house, and trained 
themselves for one month. Their friends gave them up for lost, thinking 
they had committed suicide. They lived in the sweathouse, and sweated, 
bathed, fasted, and dreamed. At the end of the second month they had 
gained so much knowledge regarding games and gambling, that they agreed 
to go home. They were very weak, and purified so much, that, when they 
arrived near the houses, they sat down almost overcome with the smell. 
Their friends welcomed them as if they had come back from the dead, and 
built a brush lodge for them some distance away, in which they could stay 
until they got accustomed to people again. 
Now the young men said, “Come, let us gamble with our prey, ‘the   
1 Loser, a person who loses at gambling, or is beaten at anythiog. * On the south side of Thompson River, a few miles above Lytton.

----

376 TELT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
losers,” and went to the brothers’ lodge to engage in a lehal game. They 
soon found things had changed, however, for the brothers won every game. 
Before spring came, the brothers had gained everything worth winning from 
the other young men, and ever afterwards were noted for their success at games. 
88. The Wounded Giant. 
A giant once stole some fish from people in the Okanagon country. A 
large number of men followed his tracks, and the following day came upon 
him asleep with his eyes open. They surrounded him, forming four rings 
with a considerable space between them. They said, “If he jumps, he will 
have to do so four times. He cannot escape.” All the men were well armed. 
One man awoke him by stabbing him with a spear. When he jumped up, 
the people shot arrows at him, and threw spears; but he jumped over them 
all, and escaped. He had many arrows in his body, and was badly wounded ; 
but he kept pulling the arrows out as he ran, and soon disappeared. 
89. The Giant who stole the Keremeous Woman. 
Once a giant stole a woman from Keremeous,! and carried her all night 
on his shoulders. He travelled very fast, jumping over cliffs and bushes, and 
from hillock to hillock. When day came he slept. After travelling far in a 
southerly and then in an easterly direction, they arrived near the edge of the 
earth where the real country of the giants is. Here the people were numerous, 
and all of them were giants. When nightfall came, the men all prepared to 
go hunting. The stolen woman fell asleep, and the people thought she was 
dead. Her husband told them she only slept. Then he pulled two very small 
balls, like fish-roe, out of her eyes, saying, “This is what makes the Indians 
sleep at night” After that she became like the giants, and slept in the day- 
time with her eyes open. 
In the giants’ country there was no fire, for they knew not how to make 
it. They ate all their food raw. Neither did they know how to catch fish, 
although they were very fond of them. They did not care much for water, 
and never washed themselves. The woman taught them how to make fire 
with sticks, and how to cook food. She also taught them how to catch fish, 
and showed them many other useful arts. The giants were grateful to the 
woman, and no longer treated her as a slave. She learned to speak the 
giants’ language. 
After living in the giants’ country a few years, she desired to sce her 
own land and friends. She told her husband he need not fear her people,   
+ Keréme'us or Keremeous, a place on the Similkameen River.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 377 
for they were very nice, and would treat him well. He took her on his shoulders, and, travelling every night, they soon reached Keremeous. The 
giant hid in the bushes while the woman went to the houses, and made herself 
known to her friends, who had thought her dead. She called her husband the giant, who came forward in great fear. She told him the people would 
not harm him. They built a very high lodge for the giant and his wife, who 
dressed in bearskins, like all giants. They made buckskin clothes for them, 
and persuaded them to discard their bearskins, and burn them. At nights 
the giant would hunt and catch deer and bears, which he tied on a string, 
like ducks, and carried over his shoulder. He also knocked down dead trees, 
and carried them under his arm, branches and all. He said these things 
were not heavy. Soon the people had an abundance of meat and skins, and 
plenty of firewood. 
The people were curious to sce him hunting: so his wife persuaded him 
to stay at home one night, and hunt on the following day. He sat up all 
night, and on the next morning went out with the hunters. He would take 
a step and then wait, and then another step and wait, so that the people 
could keep up with him. If he had gone at his usual pace, he would soon 
have disappeared from sight, even if the people had been running. Coming 
on four deer, the giant ran ahead, cought one in his hands, and choked it. 
He Pursued the others, caught them and killed them in like manner. Although 
the deer were running at full speed, he caught up with them in a few bounds. 
He said, “Deer are very wild in the daytime. It is much easier to catch 
them at night” The giant carried the four deer home on a string, and the 
people were now satisfied, for they had seen him hunting. 
The giant liked the people, and they gave him plenty of fish and birds, so that he was well pleased. He said he would go back to his own country 
and get all his people to come and live with the Indians. These were afraid, 
however, that, if he went, he would take his wife with him, and they would 
never see her again. So one day, when he was asleep, they attacked him with tomahawks, spears, and arrows. Although he was badly wounded, he 
jumped up and escaped. They never saw him again. The woman had no 
children by him, and died not so very long ago. Sama‘nxa’s’ father, called 
Yilekskwa'iluy, who was lame, and a chief in the Similkameen region, saw 
the giant, and was one of the young men who hunted with him, and tried 
to kill him. He said this giant had a strong odor, as if of burning hair, and wore moccasins three-quarters of a fathom long.   
1 A Similkamcen woman who lives on the Nicola River, about seventeen miles from Spences Bridge. She is probably about seventy years of ago.

----

378 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
90. The Hunter and the Wolf! 
A man was destitute and despised. He could kill no game, and the 
others all laughed at him. He depended mostly on what food and clothing 
people gave him, and generally went almost naked. One day he was hunting, 
and had no clothes on, save a small apron. He was very sad because he could kill nothing. He wished that some person would help him. As he was 
sitting with his head on his knees, he heard a voice. He looked up and saw a handsome man standing before him. The man said, “I am Wolf, and I 
know all about hunting and war. 1 will help you; and, if you follow my 
directions, you will become a great hunter and very wealthy.” He gave him 
an arrow with a picture of a wolf painted on it, and told him to make all his arrows after that pattern. He said, “Go and seck the little yellow flower 
nkukaxemu's? and rub it on your arrow-points. It is powerful, and causes 
death. The arrow I have given you is poisoned with it. When you hunt, 
paint your face red, and wear a feather on each side of your head”? He 
gave him his headband of wolfskin with an cagle's feather on each side. 
The man did as the Wolf had directed him, and became a great hunter and 
warrior. He became wealthy, and had for his protectors the wolf and the 
eagle. Thus the Indians learned to poison their arrows with the flower 
nkukaxemu's. 
91. The Grisly Bear who stole a Woman.t 
One fall a man and his wife were living in the mountains, hunting and 
root-digging. One day, while the woman was busy digging, a Grisly Bear 
approached her unobserved, and commanded her to follow him. She obeyed, 
and he led her to his den. Her husband returned from hunting, and waited 
in the lodge for her. As she had not arrived on the fourth day, he set out 
to search for her. He found where she had been last digging roots, and 
saw a Grisly Bear's tracks along with hers. He followed their tracks for 
some distance, but at last lost them on bad ground. Then he returned to 
the people and reported that his wife had been taken away, and probably 
killed, by a Grisly Bear. The following spring, as he believed his wife to 
be dead, he went up the mountains to burn their old lodge. He heard a 
woman singing, and presently saw his wife coming along with a grisly bear 
following her. She was digging roots and the Bear was gathering them up. 
He hid himself; but she had already seen him, and shouted, “There is no use   
1 Compare Nicola story, Nisikepsatem, p. 367; Shuswap, p. 719; and Cheyenne, 1 c., v. pr 163, * Kanusealus, 5p. 3 Hunters thas wed feathers in imitation of & dee's ears or antlers. 4 Compare Shuswap and Chilcotin stories of Grisly Bear taking women or men.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 379 
of your trying to help me. The Grisly Bear is too powerful. He is sure to 
kill you.” 
When they had disappeared, he went home and put new sinew on ‘the 
back of his bow. He also made new arrows, and arrow-heads strong and 
sharp. He said nothing to the people, but returned to the same place in 
the mountains, and before very long heard his wife singing. When she had 
seen him, he hid himself in some bushes. She came along, digging a root 
here and there, and passed close to where he was concealed, singing, “It is 
useless to attack the Grisly Bear. You must not throw your life away.” The 
Bear followed a short distance beliind her. He had his face and head painted 
red. When he came opposite where the man lay, the latter fired an arrow 
with great force, sending it right through the bear's body. In quick succession 
he shot his other arrows until the bear was dead. Now his wife joined him, and said, “Yesterday the Bear had a presentiment of his death. He sang 
his death-song all night, and this morning put dry red paint on his head and 
face. He said, ‘If hunters sing my song when I die, and pity me when I 
am slaughtered, I shall be contended.”” Now the woman taught her husband 
the Grisly Bear's song, and they sang it over the body. They went home 
and surprised the people. Thus the Grisly Bear's death-song became known, 
and afterwards hunters always sang it when they killed a grisly bear. It 
pleases the bear and pacifies him, so that he does not seek revenge. Some 
hunters also paint their heads and faces when they sing the Grisly Bear song. 
92. The Sons who sought their Mother." 
The mother of four young men died, but they did not know what had 
become of her. They searched for her all over the earth, — north, south, cast, and west, — but could not find her. Now they prepared to visit the 
upper world to find if she was there. They played on their magic flutes, 
and commenced to go upward, as if they had wings. When they reached 
the upper world, they saw a large village, where the people were singing, 
dancing, and beating drums in the middle of the houses. The village was 
built in a circle, with a large open space in the centre. The chief met them 
as they drew near, and asked them why they had come. They answered, 
“We are looking for our mother.” He said, “Your mother is here; but you 
cannot sce her, because you have not died. You must leave on earth your 
flesh part, or bodies” The brothers all returned to earth and committed 
suicide. Thus they ascended again to the sky, and lived with their mother 
and the spirit people of the upper world.   
* Compare with Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, xxxiil 
4B JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXVED., VOL. Vill

----

380 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
93. The Grisly Bear ‘Boy; or, the Stolen Girls. 
Some kind of a “mystery” stole girls from a village. Every morning a 
girl was missing. The people wept and were afraid. They could not learn 
what had become of the girls. They proposed to shift camp. Among them was a lad despised by the other people. He was small of stature, lean, and 
ugly. He dressed in rags. This lad said he would find the girls; but the 
others laughed, for they did not know his powers. His guardian was the 
grisly bear, whose skin he used as a blanket. When he covered himself with it, he became possessed of great strength and magical power. The men 
watched every night to find out what took away the girls; but invariably at 
midnight they fell asleep. This sleep was caused by the “mystery.” 
One night the lad said he would watch, and all the other men laughed 
at him, saying, “How can he detect anything when cven the shamans have 
failed?” The boy donned his bear-skin, and watched. At midnight, from the 
east appeared a large object moving in the air. It was black, excepting the 
heart or centre, which was bright as daylight. It entered one of the houses 
and emerged again, disappearing toward the west. The lad followed in that 
direction, and, after travelling a long distance, found the tracks of a large 
man. This was evidently where the “mystery” had alighted on the ground. 
He followed the tracks and came to the place where the girl's tracks also 
appeared. The monster had evidently become tired by carrying her so far, 
and now made her walk. At last the tracks reached a beaten trail which 
entered a hole in the ground. The lad travelled along in the darkness, and 
at last emerged in another country, where everything seemed old, dirty, and 
sootbegrimed. The trail was very dusty, but there was no wind to carry 
the dust. Evidently wind and rain were unknown there. There was plenty 
of light; although no sun, sky, or clouds were visible. Soon he arrived at 
a house built across the trail like a high fence. The lad pushed the door, 
which opened and immediately shut again. He found he could not open it 
from the inside. Soon he was accosted by a huge sootbegrimed man with a horrid leer on his face. The man was carrying a large sword which shone 
like a looking-glass, and was about to cut the lad in two with it. The latter 
cried, *Forbear, my friend! I will be your slave, and, besides, I will show 
you many wonderful things” The man told the lad to follow him; and, when his back was turned, the lad put on his grisly-bear:skin, and, becoming like 
a bear, he struck off the man’s sword arm with his paws, and then tore him 
to pieces. Soon he came to another house, where he discovered some of the girls, 
who were kept there as prisoners. Continuing his journey, he came to a 
third fence or house, where he was met by another man like the first one,

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 381 
and he disposed of him in the same way. In a fourth house, he found the 
rest of the girls, and liberated them. When he tried to return, he could not 
open the several doors, but he hit them with the monsters’ swords, and thus 
clove them in two. He returned home with all the girls, and the people 
were glad. He married four of the finest girls, and afterwards became a noted man. 
It is said that another time he went underground, and liberated a number of young men who had been stolen from a different village by two monster 
women. He killed these women in somewhat the same manner as he had killed the men. 
94. The Lad who ran away from his Parents.! 
(kame nema.) 
Once three brothers? lived with their parents, who treated them so 
cruelly that the eldest one ran away. He travelled many days toward the 
east! and at last arrived at a lodge from which emanated the sound of a whistle. He said to himself, “Some one must be playing a whistle” On 
entering, he found the lodge occupied by two young women. They received 
him kindly, and gave him food to eat. When he had finished cating, they 
heated water, and washed him. Then they made new clothes for him of 
buckskin, and gave him moccasins, leggings, and shirt to replace his old and 
patched robe. They asked him to stay with them and become their husband; 
but he declined, saying, “You are my relatives, I cannot be your husband. 
Besides, I wish to travel and become great.” Upon his departure they gave 
him a pack of beaver-meat to eat on his journey, and a long buckskin belt 
richly embroidered. They also gave him an axe, a tomahawk, a knife, and 
a chisel, saying, “You may need these things” They told him that after many days he would arrive at the shores of a large and wide lake, which 
was very difficult to cross. “Take off your belt,” said they, “and throw one 
end of it out over the water, and it will form a bridge upon which you 
can cross.” 
Soon he reached the lake. There the lad did as directed, and the belt 
formed a bridge upon which he crossed. When halfway across, a Beaver 
appeared from underneath the water, and asked him where he was going. 
He invited him to his house, saying, *The Beaver chief desires to see you.”   
+ Also sometimes called Story of the Lad with the Magic Belt, The second part is probably based on Buropesn folklore, Compare Hill-Tout's Report, pp. 50, 51. * Some say, four brothers. 3 Some say, north; others say that the direction which he took is doubtful. # Bone whistle, like those used by young men and women when trio. + Some say they were sisters.

----

382 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
The lad jumped off the bridge and descended into the middle of the lake 
with the Beaver. Soon they arrived in the world of the Beavers, which he 
found was a nice country, and thickly inhabited. There were many houses, 
and the people were all busy building more houses, felling and hauling trees, 
and engaged in other occupations. The Beaver chief received him kindly, and 
gave him food. Then he said, I am your relative and I wish you to see 
my country, my houses, and people. We are happy, but we have one great 
difficulty; — it takes us a very long time to cut down trees, for our teeth 
are small and dull” The lad said, “If you and your people will open your mouths, 1 will make you so that you will be able to fell trees much faster.” ! 
The Beavers opened their mouths, and the lad threw the axe, tomahawk, 
knife, and chisel into their mouths, and these implements became large teeth 
enabling them to cut fast through wood. The Beaver chief was very gratcful for this benefit, and said he would help the lad. He conducted him to the 
surface of the water and told him, “You will meet people strong in mystery 
on the other side of the lake, near the mountains; and some of them are 
powerful beings who will kill people, but they will not be able to harm you.” 
After the lad had reached the opposite shore of the lake, he pulled in his 
belt and wrapped it around his body. 
After he had travelled on some time he came to the house of two men 
who killed people. They were father and son. He entered their house and 
sat down. The elder man at once took his knife, and attacked the lad, and 
cut off his head; but immediately the head went back into its place again 
and the lad seemed unharmed. Thus father and son beheaded him four times, 
but each time the head sprang back into its place, and he was apparently 
unharmed. Then the lad rushed at the old man, wrestled the knife from him, 
cut him to pieces, and threw the bits of his body over the surrounding country; 
and the places where they fell down became the haunts of “land mysteries.” * 
Then he prepared to kill the son; but the latter begged for his life, saying, 
“Do not kill me! I will be your servant, and may be able to help you.” So he spared him, and they journeyed together. 
After many days’ travel, they came within sight of a large village. On 
the side nearest to them stood the chief's lodge, which was so high that the 
top nearly touched the clouds. Near the village was the lodge of the chiefs 
daughter, who had almost finished her period of training. She sat inside, 
playing on her whistle. The lad's comrade said, “I will procure the girl to 
be your wife” So they hid themselves near the outskirts of the village. At   
* Some say he said to the Beaver chief, “If you open your mouth, I will give you teeth that will be large sod sharp, and with these you will be able to cut wood very fist” When the Beaver opened his mouth, he threw the four implements into his mouth, and they were transformed into four teeth like those the beaver has at the present day. He said, “Henceforth all beavers shall have large sharp teeth, and be sble to fell trees with ease” + Evil spirits that haunt certain parts of the country. 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 383 
night the man went into the girl's lodge, and said to her, “I have brought 
a husband for you from a far country.” She answered, “I will see him, and, 
if 1 like him, he shall be my husband.” She spat on her whistle so that it 
kept on playing, and then she left the lodge with the man. When she saw 
the lad, she fell in love with him and consented to accompany him. So they 
all travelled together back again toward the lake. The girl's whistle continued 
to play, and the people thought she was in her lodge as usual. On the third 
day the whistle sounded much more fecbly, and on the fourth day the sound 
became very faint, and at last ceased altogether. 
Then some one said to the chief, “Your daughter does not play so loud 
as formerly. Her whistle sounds very faint” Then they sent some one to 
see, and they found the lodge deserted and the girl's whistle lying on the 
ground, making occasional feeble efforts to emit sound. 
Now the’ chief looked over the world, and saw his daughter travelling 
with two men far away. He gave chase, and soon caught up with the fugic 
tives, who saw him coming. Then the girl changed herself and her companions 
into three old stumps of trees near the trail. The chief passed by, and searched 
all around. When he did not find them, he returned home. 
His wife said to him, “Why do you return without your daughter? Did 
you not see the stumps by the trail? Those were she and her companions. 
Return at once and bring her back.” Again the chief gave chase, and soon 
drew near to the fugitives, who saw him coming. Thereupon the girl changed 
herself into an old, wrinkled woman, and her husband into a decrepit old 
man with white hair. Their servant she changed into a dog, and she caused 
a dilapidated old lodge to appear near the trail, into which they entered. 
They had just gone inside when the chief came along and asked them if 
they had seen his daughter pass that way accompanied by two men. They 
answered, “We have been living here by the trail for many years, until now 
we are gray-headed and very old, and we have never seen your daughter 
go by.” The chief searched all around, as he lost the fugitives’ tracks here, 
but he could not find any trace of them. 
Very much perplexed, he returned home to receive a scolding from his 
wife, who said, “Those old people you saw were your daughter and her hus- 
band, and the dog was their man-servant. They assumed those forms upon 
your approach. Your daughter is indeed greater in magic than you are. 
Return at once and bring her back.” 
Again the chief gave chase, and came in sight of the fugitives just as 
they reached the lakeshore. The lad at once threw his belt out over the 
water, and it formed a bridge over which they crossed. Just as the chief 
reached the edge of the lake, the lad drew in his belt, and their pursuer could 
not cross. 
They descended to the Beaver world, and received many presents from

----

384 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
the Beaver chief, for he was very grateful for the service the young man had rendered him. Then they went to the lodge of the two women, who also 
gave them many presents. As they were not able to carry half their presents, 
the girl spat on the ground six times, and thus created six slaves, who carried 
all their property. Now she made the great distance to her husband's home 
into a onc day's journey. They arrived at night, and she caused a fine large lodge to appear, in which they took up their abode. 
On the following morning the people wondered when they saw the large skin lodge there, and some of them hastened to find out who the occupants 
were. They recognized the lad, who as they thought, had been lost, and 
they hurried back and told his father, saying, “Your son who disappeared 
lives in the lodge with a finc-looking woman who is his wife. They have 
six slaves and a manservant, also valuable goods” The father became ashamed, and made up with him, acknowledging that he was wrong in treating 
him so meanly. 
95. The Woman who was impaled on a Tree. 
A man married 2 woman who would not let him touch her At last, 
getting vexed, he asked her to accompany him to the forest. Here he 
sharpened a tree-top to a fine point, and, sticking his wife on it between the 
thighs, he descended, peeling the bark off as he climbed down. When the 
husband had gone, the woman called for assistance, and her brother, who 
was hunting near by, heard her, and went to her. aid. He tried in vain to 
climb the upper part of the tree, which was smooth, and devoid of bark. 
Finding his efforts fruitless, he called on all the animals. The Squirrel, Black 
Bear, and many others tried, but all failed. Then the £#'fuen® managed to 
reach the girl by climbing with his mouth. She was very sick when brought 
down, but soon recovered. Au'tuen said, “Henceforth no woman shall be 
other than female, and every one will have a hole where this one has been 
pierced by the treetop. Henceforth all women will desire to have connection 
with men.”   
1 Compare Uma story of Lkwo'pitem (p. 285), by which name the story is sometimes called by the Upper Niaka'pamuy; also kaown to the Lillooet, * Some say, because she had no vagina. 3 A kind of fish, like a lamprey or cel, which is said to move up stream by sticking to the rocks with its mouth,

----

VI. — TALES BASED ON EUROPEAN FOLK-LORE. 
96. Ko'kenaleks.! 
A man had three? sons, the youngest of whom was very bad, and 
displeased his father much. His name was Bad Boy? and he had a little 
white dog, which always followed him. The father said to his elder sons, 
“Take your youngest brother to a distant place, and kill him, for I wish to 
see him no more. But bring back his heart to me, not alone as surety that 
you have done the deed, but because it belongs to me, and is as if it were 
part of me; for 1 love my son, although I thus kill him. He is of my flesh.” 
The brothers informed Bad Boy of their father's wish, and took him 
away * with them to a distant land! where lived strange people. Here they 
intended to kill him, but pitied him so much, that they had no heart to do 
it. They said to him, “You are our brother, and our hearts speak against 
harming you. We will kill your dog instead of yourself, and take its heart 
back to our father, but you must promise never to come back home again.” 
Bad Boy agreed to their proposition, and the brothers took back the dog's 
heart to their father, telling him it was that of his son. He ate it, and was 
satisfied. 
Now Bad Boy began, to travel. He carried in a pouch® a nickel” that 
his brothers had given him, and besides this he had nothing except his tattered 
clothes. When he felt hungry, he shut his eyes and prayed for food. When 
he opened them again, the food was ready before him. 
One day, as he was going along, a man followed him. He became 
afraid, and ran away; but the man pursued and overtook him. He said, 
“Be not afraid! I will do you no harm. 1 have come to help you, because 
you prayed and have become good. Henceforth the nickel you carry will have 
magic power. Be careful not to lose it. Whenever you throw it down in front of you, a pile of gold money will appear.” 
Soon after this, Bad Boy came to a house where he saw an old man® 
dressing himself. He asked him why he was dressing, and the man answered, “I am going to town to see the fun. A lad there, called Ko'kenaleks,! has   
+ Compare with Shuswap, p. 739. + Some say, fou. 5 The narrator of the fale called him simply Bad Boy, but sad he had a proper name which he had forgotten. 4 Some say they travelled on foot; others say, on horseback or i a boggy. # A country inhabited by people, pressmably whites, who spoke the Spanish language. «Some say, in his pocket. + American fve-cent piece. * Some say, x Spaniard. # Seems to mean, “yellow shir” or robe." His other names were, Sskwinta aad Tokaleit ts, which mean the same. 
[38s]

----

386 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
run into so much debt, that it is an impossibility for him to pay it of. He 
owes every one there, so his creditors are killing him to day. They are 
going to set a lot of large dogs on him to tear him to pieces.” Bad Boy 
accompanied the man, and arrived in town just as the dogs had killed the 
lad. A great circle of whites were there watching his death, and laughing. 
Bad Boy rushed inside the circle, and cried out, “If you give me the body, 1 will pay all his debts” The whites laughed at first, because he looked 
poor, and, besides, they wondered what value the body could be to him; but 
eventually they gladly accepted the bargain. Bad Boy hired four men to 
make a stone? coffin, and four others to dig a grave. He also hired two 
priests, — one to bless the body, and one to pray for the soul. Now, when 
he had got the body buried decently, he threw down his magic nickel, and a large heap of gold money appeared, which he gathered into a sack. With 
this he went round the town, and threw handfuls at each of Ko'kenaleks' 
creditors. * Then he went to the priests and threw each of them a handful, 
and in like manner he paid the coffin-makers and grave-diggers. Thus he 
left all the town happy. 
Continuing his travels, he came to a ranch where he saw some cowboys 
driving horses into a corral. They asked him if he would buy one, and he 
answered, “No; but I would buy a white mule, if you had one.” They went 
out, and soon came back with a band of mules, from which he selected one. 
Bad Boy rode off on his mule to another far and strange country. He said 
to the mule, “I will stay on your back always, until we reach our destination. 
I will eat and sleep on your back. You cannot stop to graze, drink, sleep, 
and take shade whenever you require.” 
At last they drew near to the hill on top of which a cannibal woman 
had her house. Here, near the foot of the hill, they saw Ko'kenalgks sitting on a stone. He was arrayed gorgeously in yellow and green blankets. At 
his death he had gone to the sky, and now he had come down again to 
help Bad Boy. He jumped on the mule, and sat with his face to his friend 
and his back to the mules head. Thus they rode until near the cannibal 
white woman's house. She was of large stature and very white. She had 
teeth and claws like a grisly bear. Her entrails consisted of snakes, and her 
flesh was that of frogs® Toads, frogs, snakes, and lizards could be seen 
moving through her body. A huge rattlesnake and a huge toad were her 
pets, and lived with her in the house. 
Ko'kenalrks said to Bad Boy, “Vou need have no fear. I will assist you. 
Go now and marry the woman” When Bad Boy entered the house, the 
cannibal asked him what he wanted, and he answered, “I have come here to 
make you my wife” She said, *I want no man, except for food; but, since   
+ Some say, marble. + Some say, a Spanish ranch. 3 Some add, “all white people had flesh like this formerly.”

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 387 
you have been foolish enough to come here, I will kill you.” She took down a ball which was hanging from the ceiling (it was the carth), and threw it at 
his head; but Bad Boy caught it on his toe and kicked it over the clouds, 
and it fell down in the middle of a large lake. The cannibal laughed, and 
said, “Oh, indeed! It seems you are great in magic. Well, I will take you 
for a husband.” That night they lay together, and she embraced Bad Boy. 
Every time she hugged him, her claws pierced his back; when she played 
with him, her claws scratched and tore his flesh; and, when she kissed him, 
she bit him. At daybreak he was nearly dead, and staggered outside, telling 
his wife to follow. 
Now, Ko'kenalsks had prepared four ane/p-sticks,! and, when the cannibal 
appeared, he beat her with them. He broke three sticks on her, and she 
only laughed; but, when he used the fourth stick, she commenced to feel 
pain, and writhed and cried. Now the frogs and snakes fell out of her flesh; 
and Ko'kenalsks gradually transformed her into a proper white woman? 
Then he entered her house, and beat her monstrous pets, transforming them 
into an ordinary toad and rattlesnake. He blew her house away, and kicked 
down the hill on which it had stood, making it a plain. Now he told Bad 
Boy and the woman that they must live together as husband and wife on the great plain where the hill had been. He made a dwelling-house, stable, and 
sweathouse for them, and caused horses, cattle, sheep, pigs, and chickens to 
appear. Thus he left them well-to-do ranchers, and returned to the sky. He 
said to Bad Boy, “I have done this for you, because you took pity on me, 
and buried my body, hired a priest, and paid my debts.” 
97. Porcupine; or, Porcupine and Horse. 
(Stazxa'inz.) 
Porcupine was a young man who lived near a chief’s house. The chicf invited him to stay with him, and the Porcupine accepted the invitation. He 
had not been living with the chief very long when the latter said, “I must 
go away from home, and during my absence I will leave my house in your 
charge. The four large boxes® which you see standing inside the house you 
must not touch. If you open them, evil will befall you.” 
When the chief had gone, the lad began %0 wonder what could be inside 
the boxes, and at last his curiosity became so much aroused that he went to one box and opened the lid. He saw it contained rope and thread of all   
| The hawberry-tre, which has large thors. 2 Some add, he said, “Henceforth white women shall be proper women, with proper fish. They shall Dot be cannibals, nor have teeth and claws like bears.” 3 Some say, baskets with lids.   
49—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXFED. VOL. VIL,

----

388 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
kinds. He shut it, and went to look into the next box. In it he saw bridles, 
halters, saddle blankets, and saddles. Then he opened the third box, which 
he found was full of blood, which soiled his finger. He was rather startled 
at finding the box contained blood, and wondered what he would find in the 
fourth one. Just then he noticed the chief returning, so he rubbed some pitch! 
over the blood-stain on his finger to hide it. 
As soon as the lad had begun to open the boxes, the chief became 
aware of it, and quickly returned. He asked the lad why he had touched 
the boxes when told not to do so. The lad denied having opened the boxes, 
so the chief asked him to show his finger. He showed one finger after 
another, and the chief said, “Show me the finger you smeared with pitch.” 
Now the chief washed the pitch off the finger, and showed the lad the blood- stain underneath. He said, “You' got that while opening the third box.” 
Then he cut off the lad’s finger. On departing, he warned the youth again, 
saying, “I will let you off this time with your life; but if you touch the boxes 
again, 1 will kill you when I return.” 
When the chief had been gone a considerable time, the lad said to himself, “He is probably now far away, and cannot quickly return. 1 will 
open all the boxes and then leave” He opened the three boxes he had 
opened before, and then opened the fourth one, in which he found a Horse. 
The latter said to him, “Let me out, and I will help you to kill the chief. 
He has kept me shut up here for a long time, and I have felt very sad and 
uncomfortable. 1 will give you advice. Saddle me and bridle me.” The lad 
took a saddle, bridle, blanket, and halter from the box containing these things, 
and put them on the Horse. He also took a lariat ® from the box containing 
ropes. When the chief returned, the Horse and lad killed * him, and cut off 
his head. 
Now the Horse said, “We will go to a far countrys” so the youth 
jumped on his back and rode of. Shortly after they had gone, the chief 
got up and jumped over his head, which at once joined his body again, and 
he became alive as before. Now he gave chase to the Horse and the lad, 
and rapidly drew near. When they saw him coming, the Horse spat on the 
ground, thus creating a large tract of mud, which their pursuer took a long 
time to pass. At last, however, he got across it, and soon came very close 
to them again. He had almost caught up with them before they noticed him. 
Again the Horse spat backward, and there was a large lake, which the chief 
could not cross. 
Soon they came in sight of a house, and the lad wished to go to it; 
but the Horse said, “You must not go there, the inhabitants are very bad.” Nevertheless the lad insisted: so the Horse reluctantly took him toward the   
+ Some say, charcoal. + Some say, a male. 3 Or lasso rope. 4 Some say that probably the lad frst lasoed him, and then the horse kicked him to death.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 389 
house. When the people saw them coming, they ran out and attacked them. 
Porcupine said, *You need not attack us, for you cannot kill us” The people 
shot at them with arrows, but did not hurt them. Now Porcupine laughed 
at the enemy and taunted them. The people fired shot and ball from guns 
at them, but without effect. Porcupine laughed at them again. He was 
wearing a conical shaped buckskin cap, and each time the enemy failed to 
kill them, the cap grew higher. Thus the enemy tried to kill them with cold 
and water and in many other ways, but without result; and, with each failure 
of theirs and triumph of the lad, the latter's cap grew higher. At last the 
people said, “We will burn you: so they set fire to the grass all around 
Porcupine and Horse, and burned them to ashes. Now the people laughed, 
and said, “We have at last killed them.” But, on looking back, they saw 
Porcupine and Horse alive as before, standing on a grassy knoll not far away. 
The people surrounded them, and set fire to the grass and burned them up; 
but the result was the same, for the couple appeared shortly afterward in 
another place. Thus they burnt them four times; but each time they reap- 
peared: so the people let them alone. Now Porcupine and Horse departed 
for another country. 
98. The Young Man and the Cannibal? 
A young man who wished to marry had a dream in which he was told 
to travel east and he would get a good wife. He travelled many days, until 
he came to the edge of the great lake of the east. That night he had another dream in which he was told that he would have to cross the lake. 
When he awoke the next morning, a small dog was looking at him, and a 
cance was tied close by at the lake shore. The Dog said, “I have been 
sent to help you. You must embark in the canoc and come with me.” The 
man did as directed, and when the Dog barked, the canoe went forward. 
They travelled without paddles. Each time the Dog barked, the canoe jumped 
ahead. It took them four moons to cross the lake. When they reached the 
opposite shore, they hid the canoe among some bushes, and the Dog dis- 
appeared. 
After landing the man travelled eastward for four days, and at last 
reached the house of the cannibal chief! When he entered, the latter would 
have eaten him; but he said, “Do not harm me. I will be your slave. — 
“Very well said the cannibal. “You must cook the people I bring home, 
and must always have my meals ready when I arrive. You will also have to feed and curry my two horses. My house has seven rooms, and you may   
+ Some adi, and afterwards separated. 3 Compare the preceding story; also Shuswap, p. 739. 3 Some say he was a white man; others say he was the thunder.

----

390 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
look through them as much as you like, except two. If you enter them, I 
shall kill you” He showed him the two rooms which he must not enter. 
They were large rooms, while all the others were small. On the following 
day, when the cannibal had gone hunting, the man looked through all the 
small rooms. One room was full of clothes belonging to the cannibal’s victims; another, full of ornaments; and another, full of weapons. Many of these things were blood-stained. In the fourth room hung the scalps of his victims, 
and strings of human nails, teeth, and ears. In a fitth room hung the bodies 
of those recently killed, and from them the lad had to obtain meat for his 
master's meals. Around the outside of the house were strewn thousands of human bones and many skulls. Almost cvery night the cannibal brought 
home a fresh body. He slept in one of the large rooms, which communicated 
with the other one. The lad boiled and roasted human flesh every day, and 
always had plenty ready for his master to eat. The cannibal told him to 
feed his black horse very little, but to feed the red onc plenty. One day 
the Black One said to him, “why do you feed the red horse so liberally? 
He is a bad horse, and only the cannibal can ride him. You will have to 
escape from here some time, and how will you manage it? If you feed me 
most, I will help you to escape” After that the lad fed the black horse 
seven times a day, and the red one only four times. Now he felt anxious 
to know what the cannibal kept in the two large rooms: so one day he 
entered them. The first one he found full of gold, silver, diamonds, pearls, 
and other wealth; and in the second one was a beautiful girl, naked and 
bound. She said she had been there six months, and begged him to release 
her. He fell in love with her, and promised to rescue her. One day, when 
the black horse had got quite fat, and the cannibal was away to the east 
hunting men, the lad took his master’s saddle-bags and filled them with the 
best ornaments and jewels he could find, having first reduced them to very 
small size. Then he released the girl, clad her with the best clothes in the 
house, and combed and anointed her hair. He told the Black Horse, that 
now he desired to escape. The Horse said, “You must take with you a handful cach of water, stone, clay, and combings of the girl's hair.” This 
he did, and, after setting fire to the house, both of them mounted the horse, 
and fled. When they reached the cance, the little Dog was ready waiting 
for them. The lad fed him, to make him strong and able to bark often. 
Thus they crossed the lake very fast. The cannibal saw the light of the burning house from afar off, returned and gave chase on his red horse. As 
the canoe neared the opposite shore of the lake, the occupants saw the 
cannibal approaching. He was riding over the surface of the water, which 
hissed and foamed as he rode along. At every place where the horse's feet 
touched, the water boiled. When the fugitives landed, the cannibal was close 
behind. The Dog and the canoe had vanished. They mounted the Black

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 391 
Horse, who told them to whip him to make him go very fast. The cannibal 
continued to pursue, and steadily gained on them. They could see his horse like a ball of fire, and himself above it, white like the day dawn. When he 
came close to them, the Black Horse called to the lad to throw down the 
water, and at once a lake was formed behind them, in which the cannibal’s 
horse sank to the ankles. He soon got across, however, and drew near to 
them again. The Black Horse called to the lad to throw down the stone, 
and a high, rocky mountain formed behind them. This retarded the cannibal 
a while; but soon he caught up with the fugitives again. The Black Horse 
told the lad to throw down the clay, and a wide tract of mud was formed, 
in which their pursuer’s horse sank knee-deep; but he soon surmounted this 
obstacle also, and drew near, as before. Then the Black Horse told the lad 
to throw down the combings, and at once behind them sprang up a dense 
forest full of underbrush and creepers. This delayed the cannibal a good 
while, but at last he got through, and gained on them again. 
The Black Horse was now getting exhausted, and said to the lad, “Reach 
forth and pull down that black cloud from the sky.” He did as directed, 
and rolled the cloud behind them. Now the cannibal became unable to see, 
owing to the thick fog and the darkness, and gave up the pursuit. The 
young man reached home safely, and lived happily with his wife. 
99. The Lad and the White Horse. 
(Vkamtei nemuz.) 
A lad lost all he possessed gambling, and wandered away feeling very 
despondent. After travelling a long distance, he came to a plain with a 
very large yellow pine-tree growing in the centre of it. He sat down under- 
neath the tree and began to cry. Suddenly he was startled by the Tree 
saying to him, “Pray, why do you cry? Pray for help, pray!” Then the 
lad prayed’ for help, and, when he looked around, he saw a white Horse 
looking at him. The Horse said, “Why do you cry? I will help you. Come 
on my back, and 1 will carry you” The lad jumped on his back, and rode 
far over the plain. At last he arrived at a lodge near a lake. He found 
it occupied by an old woman who welcomed him as her grandson. He staid 
with her a while. 
One day he said to her, “You have not much to eat, I will go and fish 
for you” She answered, “No one can catch fish in the lake. If they try 
to fish, they invariably catch dake-spirits’”* He said he would try, went 
down to the lake, launched a canoe and cast bis line. He soon caught three   
1 Some say probably be prayed to the tree. 4 Or “water mysteries,” probably those partly human, parly fish.

----

392 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
fish, and hooked a fourth one, which said to him, “Why do you catch us 
with hook and bait? Put us all back into the water” The lad did as directed, and then the fish jumped out of the water into the canoe from all 
sides, and soon filled it. When he arrived at the lodge, he surprised the old 
woman with the great number of fish that he brought home. She dried them, 
and had an abundance to last her a long time. 
Now he called the white Horse, which came and carried him to a village 
near by. Here he gambled for slaves, and won many. He also ran races 
with his Horse, and won four other horses. Now he took the slaves and 
horses he had won, and left them at the house of the old woman. She told him, that in a distant village the people were feasting and 
dancing, and that a great chief lived there who had a young daughter. He said, “I will go and obtain a wife from among the people you talk about” 
Taking the white Horse, he rode over there and found a large concourse of 
people. When he had been there some little time, he said to the people, 
“My Horse dances” and they said, “Let us see him dance.” He got off his 
Horse, and the latter danced alone. Then, mounting his Horse, he made 
him dance toward the place where the chief’s daughter was sitting. Suddenly 
he caught hold of her, and ran away with her. The chief and many men 
followed him on horseback; but he rode his Horse fast, and soon left them 
far behind. After reaching the old woman's house, he took her, his slaves, 
his horses, and his wife, and returned to his native place, where he became 
a chief, and was noted for his luck at gambling and for his wealth. 
100. Ant and the Beads! 
(Nkamteinemuz.) 
Ant was a very clever young man who wished to marry the daughter 
of a great chief. The latter told Ant that he could not marry his daughter 
until he performed a difficult task. At that time, beads were scattered all 
over the earth, and the chief asked Ant to gather them all up, heaping each 
color in a pile by itself. This seemed impossible to Ant, and he went to his 
grandmother, Short-tailed Mouse, for advice. She told him how to do it: so 
he accomplished his task, and won the girl. He heaped the beads in seven 
piles, — red ones in the first, then blue, white, black, yellow, green, and 
bone beads in the seventh. After this, his father-in-law used beads on his 
clothes, and other people began to do the same. Since that time the ant 
has always been noted for gathering things together in heaps; for instance, 
sand, sticks, and its eggs.   
+ Compare p. 393.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 393 
101. Sna’naz’ and the Shaman.! 
Sna'naz left the Thompson River and journeyed to another country to 
obtain the daughter of a famous shaman and chief. This girl was noted far 
and wide for her goodness and her great beauty. Many young men had 
tried to get her; but all had failed to pass the severe tests and ordeals the 
shaman had demanded of them. Sna'naz went for advice to an old woman who was known to be a seer, 
and noted for her great wisdom. She told him the nature of the tests he 
would have to go through, and that he could not succeed unless he obtained 
the aid of certain animals, birds, and insects. She told him the animals he must seek aid from. Now Sna‘naz solicited the animals for help, and they 
gathered together and agreed to assist him. Those of them he required he 
put in his canoe, and they were so many that the canoe nearly sank. 
He came to the shaman’s house, tied up the canoe in a hidden cove, 
and then asked the shaman for his daughter. The shaman answered, “You 
cannot have her unless you prove yourself to be worthy of her. My son-in- 
law must be powerful in magic. You must perform the difficult tasks I give 
you, before you can have my daughter” Sna'maz answered, “For such a 
prize I am willing to undergo any trial” — “Very well” said the shaman, 
“1 will begin.” He threw a copper paddle far out into the middle of the lake, and told 
the lad to bring it to him by noon on the morrow. Sna‘naz went to his 
canoe, and asked the two go'ena-ducks to dive for the paddle. They brought 
it up, one holding each end. He took the paddle to the shaman, who wondered 
at the lad’s success, and, pointing out a large bowlder, told him that on the 
morrow he would be required to break it with his head. Sna‘naz went to 
the canoe, got the Buffalo to give him his powers, charged the rock, and 
broke it in pieces. 
The shaman now pointed out a bluff of rock rising above a stony bench, and told him on the morrow he must jump over the bluff, trying to alight 
on his head. Sna’naz got the powers of the mountain sheep ram, and jumped 
down the cliff, alighting on his head unharmed. Now the shaman got several sacks full of small beads of all colors, and 
emptied them out on the grass, scattering them over a large area. Then he 
told the lad to gather all the beads together, cach color on a different string, 
by noon next day. Sna‘naz called the ants, who gathered together the beads 
in a short time, each color in a heap by itself, and then put them on strings.*   
VSLiule blanket.” This is the name of the lad who figures in the Traditions of the Thompson River Indians, xasiv., as capturer of the wind, etc. Compare Shuswap story of Sna'nas, p. 703. + Compare this story with Hill-Tout, p. 44; also the latter part with Traditions of the Thompson River Indisas, p. 88. + See Cheyenne, 1 c, p. 178. + Compare p. 592.

----

394 TELT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Long before noon the following day, Snanaz went to the shaman with all 
the beads. 
Now the shaman said, “There is a chief in a distant land who is talking to me. By noon to-morrow you must let me know what he says” Sna‘naz 
placed on the ground the large ear that he had in his canoe. It heard the 
chief talk, and reported to Sna'naz what he said. On the following day he 
told the shaman correctly what the strange chief had said. 
Now the shaman said, “To-morrow you must run a race with my daughter.” 
She was very fleet of foot, and able to run faster than a deer. Sna‘maz 
obtained the antelope’s powers, and he beat the girl in the race. 
Now the shaman asked him to make music! and Sna'naz, obtained the 
powers of the attia-bird, and produced music as if he were playing on a flute. 
These and many other tests the shaman made him go through, but 
with the help of the animals he succeeded in passing them all. The shaman 
said, “Indeed you are great in magic, and surpass even me. Now I give 
you my daughter to wife.” Sna‘naz took all the animals back to their several 
places of abode, and thanked them for their assistance. He returned to his 
own country with his wife, and lived with his people. 
Before very long his brothers became cavious of his beautiful wife, and 
made up their minds to get rid of Sna'naz. They told him that they had 
seen a large nugget of gold at the bottom of a deep chasm, but were afraid 
to descend and get it. Sna‘maz at once said he would make the attempt, 
went to the chasm with his brothers, and they lowered him down with a rope. 
When he had reached the bottom, they threw the rope down, and left him 
to his fate. 
When Sna'naz did not return home, they pretended to search for him, 
and declared that he must have been lost, or have died in the mountains. 
The eldest brother claimed his sister-in-law; but their father refused to give 
his sanction, and protected her. He said, “Sna‘naz was gifted with much 
magic, and may yet return. Besides, it is too soon after my son's death to think of your cohabiting.” Then the brothers tried to steal the woman from 
their father, but he foiled them. 
Sna'naz tried in vain to escape from the deep cleft in which he had been 
left, and would have died, had not Coyote happened along and found him. 
Sna'naz saw him peering over the edge of the cliff, told him of his predicament, 
and asked for his help. Coyote lowered his tail down, but, finding it far too 
short, he gathered up all the other coyotes, took off their tails and joined 
them together until he had sufficient length to reach Sna'naz. After pulling 
the latter up, he distributed the tails again and the coyotes put them on. 
When Sna'naz reached home and told of his brothers’ treachery, their father 
would have killed the eldest for his baseness; but Sna'naz prevented him.   
1 Some say, “better than His daughter could play.”

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 395 
102. The Turtles and the Runner. 
The Turtles were four brothers who were slow and clumsy. They all looked so much alike that one could not be distinguished from the other. 
The people laughed a great deal at them because of their slowness. One 
man among the people was a great runner, and easily surpassed all others. 
He boasted a good deal of his swiftness. One day the Turtles dressed them- 
selves all alike, put up their hair, and painted their faces alike. Then, going 
to the racecourse, they dug three holes along it, one hole being near the 
goal, another about two-thirds of the way, and one about one-third of the way. 
In these, three of the brothers hid, while the fourth onc went and challenged 
the runner to a race. All the people laughed; but the Turtle showed he 
was in earnest by betting all his goods, and the runner and his friends bet 
an equal amount also. No people were allowed to see the race; and the 
runner, before starting, promised never to look behind him. The Turtle was 
soon left behind, and the runner said to himself, *It is as I expected. The 
Turtle cannot run at all. He was very foolish to run against me, and bet 
all his goods on the race.” Just then he saw the Turtle running quite a bit 
ahead of him, (it was one of the brothers who had got up out of his hole), 
and was surprised. He ran fast, and soon overtook him. When he had run past him quite a distance, he said to himself, “I will take it easy. He cannot 
catch up with me.” Soon he saw the Turtle running ahead of him again (it 
was the third brother), and ran fast to overtake him. Leaving him far behind, 
he now neared the goal, saying to himself, *I am only a little distance from 
the goal: he cannot possibly overtake me. 1 will walk” Just then he noticed 
the Turtle (it was the fourth brother) very close to the goal: so he ran at 
his utmost speed to overtake him, but was too late. The Turtle reached the 
goal first. The other three brothers hid themselves, and the Turtle who won 
went back with the runner to claim the goods the people had bet. The 
runner thought the Turtle was great in magic, and the people never laughed 
at the brothers any more. 
103. The Girl who sought her Brothers. 
A man lived with his wife, who was pregnant, and their four sons, who 
were yet children. He said to his wife, I do not like boys. If your child 
is a girl. 1 will kill all our sons.” Now she knew her child was to be'a girl. 
and she took pity on the boys. She told them their father might kill them; 
so she advised them to leave, and prepared much food, clothes, and moccasins 
for them. The food and clothes she reduced to many times less than their 
natural size and weight, so that cach boy's pack consisted of a very small 
So—JESUP NORTH PACIC EXFED., VOL. Vil.

----

396 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
parcel. They left the lodge while their father was away hunting, and their 
mother told them to travel to some very far country. They walked one 
behind the other. The eldest aways took the lead and made the ground 
contract before them, so that in a short time they had covered a great distance. 
Nevertheless they journeyed many moons before they reached the distant country in the east, where they had made up their minds to settle. 
There they erected a fine lodge in a beautiful spot. They said they 
would now be happy, and would kill any female who might stray to their abode. They feared that trouble might come, and their happiness again be 
marred, if females entered their world. The country they had selected to live in had no human inhabitants save themselves, and as all kinds of game 
were very plentiful, they lived easily. When they had finished building their 
lodge, the eldest brother blew his breath on the ground near the lodge, and 
a red flower sprang up. Then each of the others blew their breaths, and a 
white, a yellow, and a blue flower appeared. Thus four flowers grew around 
the lodge, one toward each of the four quarters. 
Meanwhile a girl had been born in their parents’ lodge, and when she 
grew up, she noticed in the house some old clothes which had belonged to 
her brothers. She asked her mother whose clothes they were, and she answered 
that they belonged to her father. This the girl did not believe, and repeatedly 
asked her mother. At last, being tired of her daughters persistent inquiries, 
she told her the whole story. Now the girl pitied her brothers, and wished 
to find them. Her mother prepared food and clothing for her, which she 
reduced to very small proportions. During her father’s absence, she left the 
house, and travelled east on her brothers’ tracks. Although the trail was 
very old, she followed it by the old fires and other signs. When her last 
moccasins were worn out, and her clothes all torn, she reached their lodge, 
very hungry, and almost naked. She found her youngest brother at home, and told him her story. After she had eaten, she made up all the beds, and cleaned out the house. Towards evening she hid under some blankets, 
for the youngest brother told her that the others would kill her. 
When they arrived, the eldest said, “There is a woman here,” to which 
the youngest answered in the negative. The eldest said, “Why deny it? I 
can sec a woman has been working about the house and beds.” Then the 
youngest related the whole story, and the others discussed whether they should 
kill her, or not. They agreed to spare her life; but the eldest maintained 
they should kill her, for otherwise she would surely cause them trouble. At 
last the others persuaded him to relent, and their sister came out of her 
hiding-place. They agreed that she should do the cooking and keep the house, adding they had spared her life because she was their sister. They warned 
her not to touch the flowers, for, they said, “These are our breaths. Without 
them, we cannot live on this earth” The girl admired the flowers, and one

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 397 
day, when her brothers were hunting, she plucked them all, whereupon her 
brothers all went to the upper world. 
When she saw that her brothers did not return, she was sorry for what 
she had done, and cried much. She waited for them four years, and then went to seek them. She reached another country, where she came to a lodge 
inhabited by an old man. She told him her story, and he advised her to 
continue travelling until she came to a large tree with a branching top which 
reached the sky. He told her to climb up and sit in the top, and not to 
speak for. ten years, at the expiration of which time she would sec her brothers. 
She did as directed, and after four years a family camped near the tree, and 
a young man came out the next morning to chop it down. He saw the 
young woman sitting in the tree-top, and, returning to the camp, he asked 
his father to go out and bring her in. He took her down from the tree, 
and she became the wife of his son; but still she never spoke. 
After six years the father said, “It is useless having a daughter-in-law 
that is dumb. It will be better to get rid of her” He made a huge pile 
of wood, and, after placing the girl on top of it, he set fire to it. When 
the flames had reached the girl, and she was about to burn, four thunder- 
birds came out of the clouds with a loud noise, and rain and hail fell so 
heavily that the fire went out. Then the girl spoke, for the time in which 
she had to keep silence had expired. She talked to the thunder-birds, who 
were her brothers, and they took her back with them to the upper world. 
104. Old-One; or Chief and the Aged Couple; or, The Introduction of Corn. 
(Zvawa zamuz.) 
Old-One* came down from above to finish putting the earth to rights. 
He travelled in the form of an old, decrepit man with long white hair, bent 
back, and’ face and body all wrinkles. He was dirty, and had a running nose 
and sore eyes. On his garments and body there were many lice. For this 
reason nobody cared to have him enter his house, nor would the people invite 
him to stay nor give him food, clothes, or shelter. 
When he had about finished his work, and had travelled from onc end 
of the earth to the other, he came to a house where lived a poor and aged 
couple by themselves. They were barely able to get enough food to keep 
themselves alive. Only the woman was at home when Old-One came along. 
She pitied him, saying, “He is in about the same condition as we are.” She 
invited him to enter, spread her blanket for him to sit on, and gave him 
water and food® to eat. She was afraid that her husband would be angry 
with her for giving their last morsel to such a dirty old fellow; but, upon   
+ Some say, the God of the whithes, + Some say, mush of water and flour.

----

398 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
his arrival, he pitied him also, and commended her for treating the poor 
stranger so kindly. 
After he had eaten, Old-One told the couple what would happen to the 
world. He said, “This earth is very old, and is getting loose and sandy. 
The rocks are already old and are wearing away, soon the carth will not be 
strong enough to hold the roots of the trees. It will have to be changed some day, and the end may be sudden. By certain signs, people will know 
when the transformation will take place. First there will come a spring when 
leaves will come out on the trees without buds. The next year there will be buds only. The following year there will be no buds even, and neither rain 
nor snow will fall. The fourth spring there will be great rains, and much of 
the earth will be flooded. The following year there will be hail-storms, and 
the sixth year strong winds. In the seventh year there will be severe earth- 
quakes, and the mountains will fall down and the earth become as a plain. 
Many people will be killed by these things. The people will then watch the sky, and, when they see the clouds rolling like waves on a lake, they will 
know the chief is approaching. When red streaks shoot across the sky, and 
it assumes red, white, black, and yellow colors, they will know that he is 
drawing near.” 
Now Old-One made a mist before the eyes of the old couple, so that 
they could not see him. He ascended, and spoke to them from above, asking 
if they could see him. They answered, “No.” He asked them to look again,’ 
and they saw his heart, which alone was visible. He said to them, *I am 
the great chief, and now leave the earth, as my work for the present is 
finished. 1 will come again when required, and make the earth more perfect. 
I have told you the signs by which people will know when I am about to 
return. During my travels on earth, you were the only people who showed 
pity, and were kind to me: therefore I will give you what will make you rich.” Then he let fall a handful of maize, saying, “Eat these, but save one 
to plant in the ground, and from it you will get many.” Then he threw down a handful each of wheat, beans, and potatoes, and told them to plant 
these also. The couple saved and planted one seed of cach kind, and gathered 
afterwards more than they could cat. The next year they planted more, and 
eventually became rich by sling their harvests to the whites. Thus were 
these plants introduced, and, when the old couple died, the white men became 
the only possessors of the cultivated plants.   
+ Some say he blew his breath on their eyes, and thus they became able to sec.

----

VII. — BIBLICAL TALES. 
105. Creation of the Horse! and the Story of A'tam and Im. 
When this earth was very young, only two people lived on it, — a man 
called A’tam and a woman called Im? The Chief* (or God) lived in the 
upper world, and the Outcast® (or Devil) lived in the lower world. They 
were enemies to each other, and tried to do each other harm, but God was 
the more powerful. He frequently visited the earth and talked with A'tam and Im. 
One day the Devil created an animal like a horse, and made it appear 
before the man and woman. When the latter saw it, she said, *That is God 
come to visit usy’ but A'tam said it was not. At last, however, he believed 
it must be God, and they went and spoke with it. Soon afterwards God 
appeared, and then they recognized the difference. - He was angry and said, 
“Why do you mistake the Devil for me and converse with him? Have I 
not told you he is evil, and will do you harm? Then, looking at the animal, 
he said to the couple, “Well, since this beast is here, I will so transform 
him that he will be useful to you” He wetted both his thumbs, pressed 
them on the animal's front legs, and thus marked him, saying, “Henceforth you will be a horse and a servant and plaything of the people, who will ride 
you, and use you for many purposes. You will be a valuable slave of man.” 
Now the mosquitos were tormenting the horse very much, so God plucked 
some long grass which grew near by, and threw it at the animal's backside, 
and it became a long tail. He also threw some on the horse's neck, and it 
became a mane. He said, “Henceforth you will be able to protect yourself from the mosquitos.” Then he plucked out more grass, and threw it ahead 
of the horse, saying, “That will be your food.” It turned into bunch-grass, 
which soon spread over the whole country. 
Now God departed, telling the man and woman he would soon return 
and show them which trees bore the proper kinds of food to eat. Hitherto 
they had eaten no fruit, for they did not know the edible varieties. At that 
time all trees bore fruit, and the pines and firs in particular had large sweet 
fit. Now the Devil appeared, and, pretending to be God, he took the 
large long fruit of the white pine’ and gave it to Im. She thought he was   
© This story seems to be aliogether of biblical origin, except the part about, the creation of the horse-god. 2 The most common Indian pronusciation of the names Adam and Eve. 
  is said they were very ignorant and poor or helpless. “The Chief,” “the above Chief,” or the (" are Todian appellations for God. ‘samen (Outeast”), the common Thompson name for the Devil At that time the white pine bore the largest and sweetest of all fruit. 
[399]               

----

400 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
God, ate the fruit as directed, and gave some to A’tam. Then the Devil 
disappeared; and all the fruit on the trees withered up, and became trans- 
formed into cones. Some kinds shrivelled up to a small size, and became 
berries. When God came and saw what had happened, he sent the woman 
to live with the Devil, and, taking A’tam, he broke off his lower rib, and 
made a woman out of it. This rib-woman became A’tam’s wife, and bore 
many children to him.} 
106. God and the Food; or, the Repeopling of the Earth. 
God? came down to the earth, and found it was very dirty, and full 
of bad things, bad people, mysteries, and cannibals. He thought he would 
make a flood to clean the earth, and drown all the bad people and monsters. 
The flood covered the tops of the mountains; and all the people were drowned, 
except one man and his two daughters, who escaped in a canoe. When the 
water receded, they came ashore and found that the earth was clean. They 
were starving, and looked for food, but nothing edible could they see. No 
plants grew near by, only some trees of several varieties. They crushed a 
piece of fir with stones, and soaked it in water. They tried to eat it, and 
to drink the decoction; but it was too nasty, and they threw it away. Thus 
they tried pine, alder, and other woods, and at last they tried service-berry 
wood, which tasted much better. The women drank the decoction, and found 
that it made them tipsy. They gave some to their father, and he became 
quite drunk. Now they thought to themselves, “How is the earth to be 
peopled!” And they each had connection with their father without his knowing 
it. As the water receded, they became able to get more and more food; 
but they still continued to drink the service-berry decoction, and, as their 
father was fond of it, they frequently made him drunk, and had connection 
with him. Thus they bore many children, and their father wondered how they became pregnant. These children, when they grew up, married one 
another, and thus was the earth repeopled. The animals and birds also became 
numerous again. 
107. The Making of Languages 
After God* had made the flood, he went up to the sky again, but, 
fecling lonely, he thought he would let some of the people come up and live   
+ Some of the white people claim to be descended from A'tam and the rib-woman, and the priests say all people are their descendants ® The “great Chief,” or above Chie,” biblical God. Some, however, say it may have been the Old-One. + This story is sometimes told in conjunction with that of God and the Flood, or The Repeopling of the Earth, and slio with that of The Swesakuli, 4 5Chief,” or *Above Chief.”

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 401 
with him. He gave the chief of the people a dream in which he told him 
to build a pole ladder on which they could ascend to the sky. The chief 
told the people God wanted them up above, so they commenced to build as 
directed. Each day they added a pole, and at last one night the Ladder 
told them, “To-morrow by noon we are going to reach the sky.” Now God 
changed his mind and said to himself, “If people come up here and see what a beautiful country it is, they will all wish to remain here and the earth will 
be deserted.” Therefore that night, while the people slept, he took a language out of his mouth, and threw it into the mouth of the chief. Then he took 
another language, and threw it into his brother's mouth, and thus he threw 
a different speech into cach man’s mouth. When the people awoke in the 
morning, each spoke a different language, and they could not understand one 
another. Wives spoke the tongues of their husbands; and children, that of 
their father. The chief talked Shuswap, and his brothers spoke Okanagon and 
Thompson respectively. Thus people began to speak different languages, 
such as Yakima, Cree, Kootenai, Lillooet, Chilcotin, Carrier. As the men 
could not understand onc another, they were unable to add the last pole, 
which would have taken them to the sky. The people got angry at one 
anothef, and the pole ladder at last rotted away. 
108. Dispersion of Tribes and Origin of Languages. 
(Naka pamuz.) 
Once, a long time ago, the people! wanted to make a trail to the spirit 
world. They said they wished to see the Chief of the Dead? and enter the 
spirit land® without dying. When they had finished the trail to within four 
days’ journey of their goal, the Chief of the Dead spoke to them, for he 
was displeased at their presumption. He told them, that, if they continued 
their work, much evil would befall them, and that they could not expect to live among the shades without first dying. He advised them to discontinue their work until such time as he should speak to them again. Now all the people gathered together at Lytton, where they had started to make the trail, 
and they waited for the Chief to speak to them again. After waiting a long 
time, they were at the point of starvation, and were discontented. They were 
afraid to continue their work, and were tired of waiting for the Chief to speak. 
At last they began to wander away in small parties; and eventually all 
scattered abroad, except a few who ‘remained at Lytton. Long afterwards 
some of these parties returned again to Lytton; but the people of the latter 
place could not now understand their speech. During their absence, cach   
1 At that time, the people all spoke the Thompson language, and lived in the country around Lytton. + Some say, God, # Some say, the upper world.

----

402 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
party had acquired a different language, and no longer knew the Thompson 
tongue. Some of the parties never visited Lytton again, but wandered far, 
and settled in distant places. It was discovered that they also spoke strange 
languages, and had forgotten their mother-tongue. Thus languages originated, such as Shuswap, Okanagon, and Lillooet, which all differ from the Thompson 
tongue. 
109. Susakuli, or Su”sakre.! 
After God had given the people languages, he said, “It is very bad that all the people go down to the shades when they die. I am lonely, and will 
get the good ones to come up to me” Therefore he made a trail for the 
dead which led up to his abode, and sent his son to show the good people 
where to branch off to the new trail. He did this in the following manner. 
Making a young woman called Patlia'm* pregnant, she gave birth to a son 
in due time. Shortly after he was born, she sent a boy with a letter to the 
chief, stating that she had given birth to a child, but had been with no man. 
The chief answered that he did not believe in a miracle, and suggested she 
must have been with some man. He said it could not be true that the child 
had no father, and he must be known as a bastard. 
When Patlia'm received the reply, she tore up the paper, and, since she 
felt ashamed, she took her child to a swamp, where she left it. Now the 
Sheep came and the Rooster, and watched over the infant. The former kept 
it warm by breathing on it, and the latter called out loudly to every one he 
saw that God's son was there. The mother visited the child occasionally and 
gave it suck. 
Now at that time, people are said to have been very peculiar, having a 
hole or slit on cach side of the nose? They also had no fingers and toes, 
and the breasts of men and of women were alike. At last the people 
began to pay attention to the continued calling, of the Rooster, and discovered 
the child. 
When Patlia’'m, or Marie, learned this, she became ashamed, and made 
up her mind to leave. She travelled with her child until she came to a swift 
stream, into which she waded to have a drink. As soon as the water covered 
her feet, her feet developed toes, but she knew it not. Holding the baby in 
her arms, she waded in to her knees, and then bent over to put her mouth in   
+ This is the Thompson name for Christ. It a corruption of the French pronunciation of Jesus Christ. “This story is also often told as part of The Making of Languages, and God and the Flood, the last named story forming the fit part. * Evidently a corruption of Bethlehem. It is said this was her frst name, but that she afterwards changed her name to Marie or Mary. 3 Some say these slits were their privates; others say, only the women had their privates there. Stl others say, it must have been nostrils, and not privates. Compare Old-One and the Women, p. 327.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 403 
the water and drink. While doing this, her child slipped out of her arms, 
and, when she stooped forward to save it, the water rushed over her face, 
breasts, and arms. She caught the babe, and, recovering herself, found that 
she now had fingers; and her breasts and face had become like those of women 
at the present day. 
The baby was very thin, for Marie was a very young girl, and did not 
have much milk. The first night she camped, she shut her eyes and prayed 
or wished, and was surprised to hear an animal bellowing close to her side. 
Looking up, she beheld a cow with an udder almost reaching the ground. 
Marie was afraid, but the Cow told her that she was sent by God to furnish 
milk for the child. Marie let the boy suck the Cow, and he grew fat at once. 
For three. more days they travelled. The Cow followed them, and Marie 
prayed every night. On the fourth night after praying, she opened her eyes 
and saw a fine white milk jug standing on the ground. Now she milked the 
Cow, and after this the boy was able to drink and walk. 
Soon he grew into a man, and began to travel about among the people, 
saying he was God's son, and telling them what God wished, and all about 
the new trail. They said he was a liar, and wanted to kill him; but he was 
full of magic, and, when they sought him, he would make a number of people 
appear just like himself, so that they were unable to tell one from the other. 
He also often changed his form, so that his pursuers could not recognize him. 
At last, however, he allowed himself to be taken, and the people agreed to 
kill him. They made a cross of wood and forced him to carry it to the hill 
where he was to be crucified. The cross was very heavy, and, after carrying 
it a little ways, he became exhausted, and afterward dragged it behind him. 
Now, when he came to the lake called Salit}! he walked across on the top 
of the water, dragging the cross along. After he had reached the opposite 
shore, he noticed his sister, who was a prostitute, following him, and weeping. 
As she could not cross over as he had done, he dragged the cross back, let 
her sit down on it, and took her across. Thus a ridge appeared straight 
across the lake where the cross had been dragged, and bushes grew on it; 
it may be seen at the present day. 
When he reached the top of the hill? the people erected the cross and 
nailed him to it. The told them that they would have to strike each nail 
ten times on the head before it would pierce his skin, and this turned out 
to be true. At last his blood began to flow, and when his sister saw the 
drops of blood on the wood she wiped them off with her long hair. Thus 
he died, and went to the land of the dead, where he remained three days. 
Here he ransomed all the good dead men, or shades, by paying® for them 
with his blood, and led them back again to the earth. .   
1 The name of a lake near Osoyoos in the Okasagon country, a litle north of the boundary line. = A low bill sear Sal} Lake. 3 Some say he paid the Chief of the Dead others say, the Devil. 
SLJRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

404 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
Now he procured a mule and rode on it for forty days, showing himself 
to the people, and preaching. Where his saddle-bags hung on the mule there 
was left a mark down on cach side from the withers: therefore mules all 
have this mark at the present day. The redeemed shades, who now had bodies like men, followed him wherever he went. He gave them some of 
his blood, saying, “Henceforth you will work for me, and be known as priests. 
This blood is of great value, and your possession of it will show that you 
are my representatives. You must teach the people, and build churches, and 
sprinkle the people and churches with my blood.” Now he changed some 
of the blood into bread and fishes, and gave all the people a great feast. 
After that he went over the new trail of the dead, and, reaching the sky, sat 
down at God's right hand. His name was Sisakule, or Susakre’. Since 
then, good people when they die are said to go over the new trail; but before 
that, only the one trail was known, over which all Indians went to the world 
of the dead.

----

VIII — HISTORICAL TALES. 
110. War Story (Nikwe'ixen and Slemti'tsa). 
Formerly there lived two Tcawa’xamux brothers by name Nikwe'ixen® 
and Slemtitsa? The latter was the younger and a man of large stature. 
They were warriors, and noted as blood-thirsty and quarrelsome. Although 
they lived in Nicola, where they ranged the country hunting and fishing as 
far cast as Douglas Lake, they were of pure Nrak-a’pamuy blood. ~ Slemti'tsa 
killed seven or cight men of his own tribe. Once the Ut'mqt were rather 
short of food, and a number of them came down the Coldwater River, and 
arrived in Nicola to hunt and fish. The brothers went to Nsi'sqet, where 
the Utd’mqt were camped, and killed a man called Ta'uta, whereupon the 
others at once struck camp and went home. Shortly after this a noted 
Uta’mqt named No'ea* raised a large war party, and went to Nicola to 
search for the murderers. They surrounded and attacked the house of a 
leading Stéwi’xamux,® called So'xkokwas,’ who defended his house alone, and 
challenged the leader of the Uta’mqt to single combat. He asked them why 
they attacked him when he had never harmed any of their people, and they answered that they wished to catch the two brothers who had murdered 
Ta'uta, and thought they were living there. So’xkokwas told them they were 
fishing up at Pena‘asket’s camp, near Douglas Lake, whereupon the war party 
departed. As soon as they were out of sight, So’xkokwas sent a boy on 
horseback up through a gulch in the mountain, and then around to Douglas 
Lake, to warn Kaulfs and Kenux&sket,] with whom the brothers were staying. 
These men were relatives of his own, as well as relatives of the brothers. 
When they received the news, they made ready to shift down to Nicola Lake. 
As they were only distant relatives of the murderers, and bore a good name, 
they did not think the Uta’mqt would seek revenge on them. After telling 
the brothers to be on the alert, they rode ahead with the packtrain and the 
    
© AIL the parties mentioned in this sory were known personally to the oldest Indians now living. Some ¢ memory. 2 Probable meaning is “littl black foot” (Z- probably Okanagon diminutive; buei, related to the Okanagon word for “blacks” ~sen, compound form for “foot”. 3 The latter past of the name, -#t1a, is the compound form of the word for “skin” or “covering.” + Beaver” 5 “People of Stewi's," one of the Indian names for the Nicola country. As a tribal name, it is generally applied to those people of Nicola who were of Athapascan descent. © Meaos “sun,” derived from. tt buat, the common Niakapamu tem for sun. The present So'xkokwas, who lives at Sulu’, Is the descendant of this man. * Means phelp,” or “helping day,” from dems/xem, Sto help,” and 'ke, the compound form of the word, for “day.” 
  (405)

----

406 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
women and children, .of whom there was a large number. The pack-train 
was loaded mostly with dried trout. They drove along boldly, not expecting 
the Utd'mqt to molest them. The brothers followed a good distance behind, 
taking advantage of cover, and keeping a sharp lookout. The Uta'mqt saw 
the pack-train approaching, and attacked them from ambush. When they 
came near enough, they shot Kauli's and Kenuxésket with many arrows and 
bullets, and they fell off their horses. When Nrkwelixen and Slemti'tsa saw 
what had happened, and that there was a large war party, they made a 
détour. The Uta’mqt did not molest the women and children, but they took 
most of the pack-horses, killed the fattest ones, and had a feast. The others 
they took with them loaded with dried trout. Since they failed to find the 
brothers, they returned almost immediately. Not long after this the brothers 
murdered a Tcawa’xamuy near Spences Bridge. The chief relatives of this 
man were Gistimt and Nxeit'eks, who presently caught Slemtitsa in a lodge 
at Spences Bridge, and killed him. The other brother, NLkwe'ixen, afterwards 
joined a war expedition against the Lillooet, and was killed in battle. 
111. War Story of Women at Bota'ni. 
(Nkamtei nemuz and Teawd xamuz.) 
Once a party of about ten or more women from Lytton went to Bota'ni 
to dig roots. Many of them were maidens, and one old woman was in charge. 
They had only been there a day when a Shuswap war party came through 
the valley on their way to attack the people of Lytton or neighborhood. 
They had two young men as scouts ahead of the party, who, in case of 
seeing danger, were to give a signal in imitation of the cry of the flying- 
squirrel, when the party would at once lic down in hiding, and not proceed 
until signalled to again. Towards evening the scouts came upon the camp 
of the Lytton women. They climbed a tree, and gave out the cry of the 
flying-squirrel. Some of the women said, Flying-squirrels are calling from 
a tree near by” Some of the older women, looking in that direction, thought 
they saw the form of a man in the tree, and at once suspected danger. The 
old woman in charge said, “These are scouts of a war party watching us. 
If we take alarm, they will kill us. I will call them in and entertain them. 
You young women play with them much, and let them sleep with you. This 
is our only chance” She called on them to come into camp, saying, *Why do you hide from us? We have young women here who arc anxious to see 
you, and there are no men here” The scouts wished to have the women 
all to themselves, therefore they did not signal to their party to come on, 
but descended from the trees, hid their weapons, and entered the camp. 
They spoke the Thompson language, but not very well. The tallest and

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 407 
oldest one had his hair tied up in a knot on the crown of his head, and had 
his face painted with micaceous hematite, so that it sparkled brilliantly. The 
women asked them what they were doing there, and they said they were 
hunting and had lost their way. They were about to camp near by, when 
they became aware of the women's camp. The old woman said, “Have some food, then sharpen all the points of our root-diggers for us, that we may dig 
well to-morrow. After that you can play yourselves as much as you like 
with the girls, and choose partners for sleeping with to-night.” The young 
women played a great deal with them, and two of them went to bed with 
them. About midnight the scouts became very tired, and soon fell fast asleep. 
Just about daybreak all the women surrounded them, and, pointing their root- 
diggers at their throats, breasts, stomachs, and legs, at a signal from the old woman, they pushed down together with all their strength, transfixing them 
to the ground and killing them. The old woman then cut off the head of 
the one painted with micaccous hematite, threw it into her basket, and they 
ran homeward along the ridge of the hills. They had to go a distance of 
about twelve miles. As soon as it was daylight, the war party sent out some 
other scouts to find out what was wrong, and to learn what had become of 
the first two. When they found their companions murdered, they signalled 
to the party to come on. The war party now hastened to overtake the 
women, but the latter reached the Thompson River at Lytton just as the 
Shuswap came running down the hill above. The women were hastily ferried 
across, and not any too soon, for presently the Shuswap warriors gathered 
along the opposite bank. The Lytton people armed themselves, and there 
was an exchange of arrows between the parties at long range across the 
water. The old woman pulled the head out of the basket, and, holding it 
up by the hair in view of the Shuswap party, shouted, *Sparkling-Face is 
here. Do you want to see your friend Sparkling-Face?” Some people stuck 
the head on the end of a pole, and marched with it up and down in view of the Shuswap, at the same time singing war songs and taunting the enemy. Afterwards they threw the head into the Thompson River. Meanwhile canoes had crossed the Fraser, and runners had gone up the Thompson some distance 
to give the alarm; and the Shuswap, being afraid lest their retreat might be 
cut off, went back up the hill and disappeared. Soon a large party of war- 
riors crossed from Lytton, and, other parties having crossed a few miles up 
both the Fraser and Thompson, they converged on Bota'ni Valley, where 
they joined forces and followed the Shuswap with all speed. The latter, 
however, made good their retreat; and the Lytton people, being unable to 
overtake them, turned back from Hat Creek.

----

408 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
112. Account of Cumaxa’ltsa. 
(Nkamtei nemuz.) 
The most cruel and the worst Indian remembered among the Thompson 
people was Cumaxa'ltsa, a brother of the chief of the band just above 
Spences Bridge. He generally lived at Peqa'ist, about cight or nine miles 
above Spences Bridge, on the south side of the river, and was an uncle to 
the late Chief Cumaxa'ltsa of that band. He was a very tall, big man, and 
possessed of great strength and agility. He had rather ugly features, his 
cheek-bones especially being very prominent, and appearing like knobs on his 
face. He almost invariably dressed in the same way, — in moccasins, buck- 
skin trousers without legs, and a heavily fringed buckskin shirt without arms. 
He always went armed, and was a shaman as well as a warrior. He was a noted fighter, and had killed a number of Lillooet and Shuswap on war 
expeditions and in quarrels. He was related to the Shuswap, his father being 
partly Shuswap in blood. He had several wives at different times, one of 
them being a native of Similkameen. He treated them so harshly, that two 
or three of them hung themselves. He was a man without any feelings of 
remorse or pity, and kindness was foreign to his nature. When told of the 
death of a friend, or even when his own child died, he treated the matter 
as a joke, and would indulge in much laughter. Once some northern Shuswap came down to buy fish, and wintered at Pima'inus, about five miles above 
Spences Bridge, on the south side of the river. Among them was a very 
tall woman, taller than most tall men. One day Cumaxa'ltsa visited their 
camp, and laughed when he saw this woman. Then he jumped at her, struck 
her on the head with a club or tomahawk, saying, “This woman is too tall, 
she should not be alive” Her friends buried her body under the roots of a 
pine-tree on the side-hill near by. This tree was cut down during the con- 
struction of the Canadian Pacific Railroad, and her bones were scattered. 
Cumaxa'ltsa also killed a good many members of his own tribe, including 
members of his own band, some of them relatives of himself. He did this 
just as he took a notion, and in most cases without cause or provocation. 
Sometimes he would take a fancy to a woman, and kill her husband so as 
to get her. Some Indians were afraid of him, and others tried at different 
times to kill him; but he was always on the watch, and escaped. Besides, 
he belonged to a powerful family, to whom some of the other Indians did 
not care to give offence, and who in a manner guarded him because of blood 
ties. He had become such a nuisance, however, that a number of Indians 
made up their minds to combine, if necessary, and get rid of him. In the 
summer of 1856, the year before the whites came to the country, Cumaxalltsa 
went to Bota'ni Valley with a number of his own people and many others 
 

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 409 
from Spences Bridge. They all camped on the same ground, as was the 
custom! One day many of the men from the camp went out hunting, including 
all of Cumaxa’ltsa’s male relatives who were there. He himself did not go, 
as he felt lazy or unwell. The men who had agreed to kill him thought this 
would be a good chance, and, after a short conference, decided on a plan, 
which they carried into execution successfully. There were seven of them; 
and as six of them believed Cumaxa’ltsa to be invulnerable to arrow or ball, 
they armed themselves with knives only. The seventh man was the shaman 
Sqemmi'n,? belonging to a place near Spences Bridge, who was armed with 
a gun. Of the other six, four belonged to the Lytton band, and two to 
Cumaxa’ltsa’s own band, one of these being a cousin or second-cousin. This 
man was on good terms with Cumaxa'ltsa, and, on entering the lodge with 
his companions, talked very sociably to him, and presently invited him towards 
the centre of the lodge to have a game of gambling-sticks with them. This 
was done to draw him away from his gun and other weapons, which were 
near his bed. Cumaxaltsa was fond of gambling, and presently came and 
sat down with them to play, having no weapon on him except a large knife. 
There were no other people in the lodge excepting some women and a few 
children. After a time two of the Lytton Indians came in and sat down, 
watching the game. Cumaxa'ltsa was not suspicious, as he saw no weapons 
on them. However, when the other two Lytton Indians came in, he became 
suspicious, and proposed that they should continue the game near his bed. 
This was that he might easily reach his weapons. Thereupon his cousin 
took hold of him around the body with both arms, keeping Cumaxa'ltsa’s 
arms locked to his side; and as this was the signal, the other five men jumped 
on him and began to stab him. The women and children tried to run out, 
but Sgemmy'n stopped them at the door. Cumaxalisa broke loose, and stabbed 
several of his antagonists. Although severely cut up, he would have made 
his escape out of the door had not Sqemmi’n met him there and shot him 
dead at the threshold. The men who had taken part in this affair at once 
disappeared, and no one touched Cumaxa'ltsa’s body until his relatives came 
back from hunting in the evening. On the following morning all his people 
struck camp, and carried his body down to the river, and buried it opposite 
Mud Slide. Afterwards it was removed to the graveyard near Prq'a’ist. 
Everybody was glad of Cumaxalltsa’s death except a few of his immediate 
relatives. Perhaps nothing would have come of this murder had not one of 
the Lytton Indians, on his way up to Cornwalls, when passing the camp of 
Cumaxa’ltsa’s relatives, called across the river to them, and taunted them for 
  
+AU Boni the several tribal divisions had their own recogolsed campingites. All the Indians of ‘Spences Bridge aad sbove there camped together, A noted shaman and orator, slso known as Pe'sks, and (0 the whites as Paska, Pasco, and Pasqus. He was a native of Nokaswa'ultsn, sbout four miles above Spence Bridge, on the north side of the river, but in Tater days generally lived around Oregon Jack's Creek. He died recently, sged about ninety.

----

410 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
not avenging his death. On his way home this man did the same thing, 
and one of the old men in the camp taunted the young men for standing 
those jeers. Thereupon a nephew of the deceased jumped into a canoe, 
crossed the river, and pursued the Lytton man, who was on horseback. He 
overtook him on the flat near where Pierre Moren's ranch-house now stands, 
shot him dead, and took his horse. After this he took his uncle's name 
Cumaxa’ltsa, by which name he was known until his death.! This happened 
about two or three years after the murder of Cumaxalltsa at Bota'ni. A 
year or two after this, Sowd'xexken® of Spences Bride, who was a relative 
of Cumaxaltsa, killed another of the Lytton men by suddenly drawing a 
ram's-horn bow from underneath his shirt and shooting an arrow through his 
body. Within less than a year afterwards he killed yet another of the Lytton 
men at a large gathering of Indians just below Spences Bridge. Some of his 
friends asked him to exhibit his shooting, which he did by shooting an arrow 
up in the air on a slight slant; and on coming down, it hit the Lytton Indian, 
wounding him so badly that he died shortly afterwards. It was believed by 
every one that Sowd'xexken did this on purpose, and that the arrow was 
poisoned. He was a very noted archer, perhaps the best in the whole tribe. 
The relatives of the Lytton men never attempted to avenge their deaths. 
After Cumaxa’ltsa had been murdered, his Similkameen wife went home to her own 
country, taking along her year-old boy. About twenty years afterwards, when 
the latter had grown to be a man, he came to the Thompson for the purpose 
of avenging his fater’s death on Sqemmi'n. The white men’s laws were strong 
in the country then; and either Chief Cumaxa’ltsa advised him not to do it, 
or else he was afraid of being hung by the whites. Anyway, he returned 
home without making any attempt on the lives of Sqemm'n or his sons. 
113. Account of the Lytton Chiefs. 
(Nkamtci nemuz.) 
The greatest chief of the Thompson Indians in recent times was Cex- pe/ntlem, or Cixpentlam, of Lytton. He was known to the whites as Spi'ntlam. 
He and his father and grandfather had been recognized as the head chiefs 
or the most important and influential men of the tribe. They had great 
influence all over the tribe, including the Similkameen country and wherever 
the Thompson language was spoken. They exerted great influence also among   
* This man became chief of the band at an exly age, and was a remarkably fine speaker. He died about 1903, aged about seveaty. This man was known to the whites under the name of Masatchie (Chinook for bad). He was half Shuswap, 45d a warrior in his young days. He was noted as quiet, kindly, determined, and brave. He was very independent, easly slighted, however, and had a strong temper when roused. He died about 1875, aged bout sixty years of more.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. an 
the neighboring Lillooet, Shuswap, and Okanagon, who respected them and 
paid them considerable deference. Their advice and speeches always com- 
manded a great deal of attention. Cexpe'ntlem had been chief a number of 
years, and was still in his prime when the whites came to the country (in 
1858). Through his mother he had both Lillooet and Shuswap blood in his 
veins. His father was a pure Thompson Indian. About the time when he 
became chief, or shortly before that, the Upper Thompsons made their last 
real war expedition against the Lillooet, whom they killed in great numbers. 
Upon their return, one of the warriors made a great exhibition at Lytton, * 
and boasted of his exploits. Cexpe'ntlem was annoyed at the derogatory 
terms that he applied to the Lillooet, slapped him in the face, and rebuked 
him in scathing language before the assembled people. He was always a 
peacemaker, and opposed to wars, fights, and quarrels of any kind. He liked to see a good wrestling-match, however, and always bet on his own men in 
intertribal wrestling-matches. Cexpe/ntlem was a very wealthy man, and owned 
a large number of horses at a time when most of the Indians had none. 
He also had a number of wives. Shortly after he had become chief, he called a gathering of the tribe of Lytton, and slaughtered many horses to 
feast them. At this gathering he told the people that he was altogether opposed to wars, and declared his intention of going to visit the Lake Lillooet 
and of making perpetual peace with them. The Thompson Indians had been 
fighting those people for very many years, and at that time held many Lillooet 
as captives. Cexpentlzm travelled through the country of his own tribe and 
also through a considerable part of the neighboring Shuswap and Okanagon 
territory, buying up all the Lillooet slaves. Only a very few remained who 
did not wish to return to their country, — possibly less than ten altogether. After he had come back to Lytton, he loaded many horses with food and 
presents. With a small number of his own men, he started for the Lillooet 
country. His people told him he was foolish to take so few men along, 
saying that the Lillooet would attack them when they saw such a small 
company, and by killing them would try to pay off old scores. When the 
Lake Lillooet saw the Thompson Indians approaching, they took up arms and prepared to fight; but Cexpe'ntlem went out alone to them, and soon 
persuaded them to lay down their arms and to receive the party. Cexpe/ntlem 
staid there several days, and a large number of Lillooet assembled. He told 
them that he had come there to put an end to war between his own tribe 
and them, and as surety of this he had brought to them all their people who 
had been slaves in his tribe. These he had bought up at much expense, and now he gave them their freedom and returned them to their country and 
friends. The Lillooet chiefs made a fire, and they and the Thompsons sat around it and smoked before the people, first out of Cexpe'ntlem's pipe, and 
then out of the leading Lillooet chief's pipe. This was symbolic of their 
S3--JRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

412 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS, 
being friends, having one fire and one food. The one fire warmed them all, 
just as if they were one family in a single lodge. The one pipe passed around 
Was the same as if they all partook of the same food out of the same dish, 
and the two pipes as if the food of one was the food of the other. This 
was the same as acknpwledging before all that they were friends. In these 
ceremonial or important smokes every participant was solemn, and the pipe 
was passed around in total silence until finished, each one taking a few puffs 
in turn. Many speeches were made, and then Cexpentlem feasted the Lillooet 
with the food he had brought, and gave presents to all those Lillooet who 
had had relatives killed by Thompsons. This ended the long series of wars 
between the Thompson and Lillooet, in which the latter had been great sufferers. 
Cexpe'ntlem also made a treaty of peace with Governor Douglas when 
the white miners first came up Fraser River, in 1858. The whites had killed 
some Indians in the Canyon; and some of the Indians there had in conse- 
quence been fighting them. This news had spread, and hundreds of warriors 
from all parts of the Upper Thompson country had assembled at Lytton with 
the intention of blocking the progress of the whites beyond that point, and, 
if possible, of driving them back down the river. The Okanagon had sent 
word, promising aid, and it was expected that the Shuswap would also render 
help. In fact, the Bonaparte, Savona, and Kamloops bands had intimated 
their desire to assist if war were declared. For a number of days there was 
much excitement at Lytton, and many fiery speeches were made. Cuxcuxé’sqet, 
the Lytton war-chief, a large active man of great courage, talked incessantly 
for war. He put on his head-dress of eagle-feathers, and, painted, decked, 
and armed for battle, advised the people to drive out the whites. At the 
end of his speeches he would dance as in a war-dance, or imitate the grisly 
bear, his chief guardian-spirit. Ciinami'tsa, the Spences Bridge chief, and 
several other leading men, were also in favor of war. Cexpe'ntlem,. with his 
great powers of oratory, talked continually for peace, and showed strongly its 
advantages. The people were thus divided as to the best course to pursue, 
and finally most of them favored Cexpe'ntlm’s proposals. With the arrival 
of Governor Douglas and the making of explanations or promises on his side, 
most of the people favored peace; and finally Cexpe'ntlem, on behalf of his 
people, allowed the whites to enter the country. Nobody now knows the 
exact agreement or promises made by either party. The Indians dispersed, 
and did not afterwards molest the whites, although during the following few 
years a number of individual whites were killed by Thompson Indians at 
different places in retaliation for injuries inflicted on them. Had it not been 
for Cexpe'ntlem, there would certainly have been a war with the whites, and 
much bloodshed would have resulted. Cuxcuxé'sqEt never forgave Cexpe'ntlem 
for bringing about peace at that time. Cexpentlem at one time was very 
fond of pomp and display. Whenever he went any distance, he drove his

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 413 
whole band of horses along, and always had from ten to twenty or more young men as an escort, all of them decked out and well armed. On special 
occasions he had as many as thirty or forty. Many young men liked to go with him on journeys, as he always supplied them liberally with food, gave 
them many small presents, and there was always plenty of display and amuse- 
ment. Once he went to visit Chief Paul at Kamloops, and the two chiefs 
met each other with much ceremony and salutes of firearms’ and drum- beating. In later days Cexpe'ntlem was baptized by the Anglican priests of 
the Lytton Mission, and was appointed chief in church affairs over the bands 
immediately above Lytton, another man being appointed by them as chief at 
Lytton. He was never very satisfactory to them, however, as he was getting 
old and could not learn all their prayers; and, besides, he remained an inve- 
terate gambler up to the time of his death. He never took a great interest 
in church affairs, and at the time of his death had lost most of his power, 
and was possessed of very little property. He died about 1888, when most of the Indians were at Bota'ni, and a great number of people attended his 
funeral and the paying-off ceremony. He was over seventy years of age at the time of his death. Cexpcntlem’s father was chief when the Hudson Bay 
chief (probably Governor Simpson, in October, 1828) came down the Thompson 
in a canoe, and they exchanged presents at Lytton. His father was not as noted a man, however, as his grandfather, who was chief when the canoe 
came down Fraser River, and who met the Sun at Lytton His name was 
Tmenteu'ten, or Yementeu'ten; and it is said that he was such a great orator, 
he could make people cry, laugh, or do almost anything he wished. He was 
also a peacemaker and very much opposed to war. Once a very large party 
of Shuswap came down Fraser River to make war on the Thompson people 
of Lytton and neighborhood. They failed, however, to surprise the Thompson, 
who gathered and prepared to give them battle on the cast side of Fraser 
River, two or three miles above Lytton. Meanwhile the alarm had spread up Fraser River, and the men from the west side had crossed and were 
prepared to intercept the Shuswap and to cut off their retreat. The Shuswap 
found themselves hemmed in by the river to the west, rough mountains to 
the east, a large force of enemies north of them on higher ground, and a 
larger force advancing on them from the south. Finding themselves thus 
entrapped, they prepared to fight, dividing their party into two lines, — one 
facing each of the opposing armies. The Thompson parties were just getting 
within range, and exchange of arrows had begun, when Imentcu'ten arrived on the scene, and, heedless of danger, rushed out between the opposing parties 
and harangued them to desist. Presently both parties stopped fighting and 
     
  
! This custom was probably copied from the Hudson Bay Company, who where in the habit of saluting with firearms the approach to their fort of the governors and other dignitaries. 2 Simon Fraser, on his trip down Fraser River in 1808. 
   

----

414 TET, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
sat down facing each other. He signalled to the women, who were watching 
from a distance, to bring food, and entertained the Shuswap. at a feast, for 
they were very hungry and thirsty. After that, an exchange of presents took 
place. The Shuswap divested themselves of most of their clothes, as they 
had little else, and gave them to the Thompsons as presents; and the latter 
gave them other clothes in return. The Shuswap were well pleased, and went 
home without harm to themselves and without having harmed any one. 
114. Tradition of Simon Fraser's Visit in 1808. 
(From Semali'tsa, a Niakapamux'o'z woman from Styne Crock) 
My grandmother told me that when she was a young girl she was playing 
one day in the summer-time (about the time the service-berries get ripe) near 
the riverbeach at the village of Strain, when she saw two canoes, with red 
flags hoisted, come downstream. She ran and told her mother, and the people 
gathered to see the strange sight. Seeing so many people gathered, the 
canoes put ashore and several men came ashore. Each cance carried a 
number of men (perhaps six or seven in cach), and many of them wore strange 
dresses, and everything about them was strange. Some of the men looked 
like Indians, and others looked like what we now call white men. Among them was a Shuswap chief who acted as interpreter. Our people were not 
afraid of the strangers, nor were they hostile to them. The strangers produced 
a large pipe, and had a ceremonial smoke with some of our men. After 
distributing a few presents, they boarded their canoes and went on to Lytton. 
They remained one or two days at Lytton, where they were presented with 
food of various kinds, and gave in exchange tobacco, beads, and knives. 
Runners from up the river had come down about a day ahead of them along 
the east side of Fraser River to Lytton. The Lytton chief Imentou'tsn 
went up the cast bank of the Fraser, and met them two or three miles above 
Lytton, and conducted them to his place with considerable ceremony. All the 
Lytton people were assembled to meet them, and before they left there they 
had many talks and smokes with the Indians. Next day a number of people 
who were camped in Bota'ni Valley came down to see them; and the news 
having reached up the Thompson as far as Spences Bridge, some of the men 
from there also came down, — those having horses, on horseback; and those 
having none, on foot. The Spences Bridge chief ran on foot all the way, 
and arrived in time to see the strangers and to deliver a great speech, but 
some of his people arrived too late to see them. The Lytton chief at this 
time was also a great orator. The Spences Bridge chief was presented with 
some kind of a metal or brass badge, and a hat worn by the leader of the   
tse p43.

----

TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 415 
strangers whom the Indians called “the Sun.” He was called this because of some kind of shining emblem he wore on his hat or cap, which resembled 
the Symbol of the Sun. The Indians applied names to most of the strangers, 
all taken from some feature of their appearance or from certain marks or 
emblems on their clothing. After leaving Lytton, at some place close to 
Si'ska, one of their canoes was swamped in a rapid, and some of the men 
were saved with difficulty, after having been some time in the water. They 
proceeded down Fraser River, returned again during the time of the salmon- 
run; and after resting at Lytton, they continued up Fraser River to some 
place beyond the northern Shuswap country, from where they had come. 
Many people saw them again on their return journey, as they were then 
assembling on the rivers for salmon-fishing. Probably more people saw them 
when they came back than when they went down. Some Indians thought 
they were just people from a far country and of a different race, for they 
had heard vague rumors of the strange people with guns, who, it was expected, might find their way to this country some time; but very many people thought 
they were’ beings spoken of in tales of the mythological period, who had 
taken a notion to travel again over the earth; and they often wondered what 
object they had in view, and what results would follow. They believed their 
appearance foreboded some great change or events of prime importance to 
the Indians, but in what way they did not know. 
The next appearance of similar people in the Thompson country was 
about a generation later, when a large canoe manned by people like half 
breeds, and Indians, and having a white chief on board, came down Thompson 
River! They stopped a short time at Spences Bridge, where Teuit‘ska and 
many other Indians (now nearly all dead) saw them. Some of the crew had 
long hair, like Indians, and most of them wore blue and white hooded coats 
with bright buttons. They did not create much surprise, however, as it was 
known that they were Hudson Bay men from the fort at Kamloops. After 
that no white men appeared at Lytton until lately, when the great crowd came after gold, in 1858, and along with them the Chinese (the following 
year), who as the Indians thought at first, were the women of the whites. 
Since then there have been whites with us constantly. The priests did not arrive until several years later, the first ones being the Black-Robes (Catholics) 
whom we had heard of before; but they left us after a time, and then the 
present kind of priests came (Anglicans). The Indians need not trouble about 
their lands or anything else, for since the whites came we have been dying 
off steadily, and before long there will be no Indians left, and the whites will 
have everything to themselves.   
+ Probably Govermor Simpson, on his journey from Fort Thompson or Kamloops to Fort Langley, in October, 1828.

----

416 TEIT, MYTHOLOGY OF THE THOMPSON INDIANS. 
115. Mythological Version of the Capsizing of Simon Fraser's 
Canoe in Fraser River! 
(Nkamteinmuz.) 
Many years ago, but at a time long after Coyote had finished arranging 
things on earth, he appeared on Fraser River in company with Sun, Moon, 
Morning-Star, Kokwe'la, ‘nmiipem (“diver”), and Skwia’xenemus (“arrow-armed 
person,” “person with arrow arms or shoulders’). These seven came in a 
bark canoe, and came down from the Shuswap country above. They landed 
at Lytton, where many people saw them. Continuing their journey, and when 
in the middle of the river, a short distance below Lytton, the Moon, who was 
steersman of the canoe, disappeared with it under water. The others came 
out of the water and sat down on a rock close above the river. Then 
Skwia’xenemux fired many lightning arrows, and ‘nmiipem dived many times 
into the river. The Sun sat still and smoked; while Coyote, Kokwe'la, and 
Morning-Star danced. Coyote said, “Moon will never come up again with 
the canoe;” but Sun said, “Yes, in the evening he will appear.” Just after 
sunset, Moon appeared holding the canoe, and came ashore. All of them 
embarked, and, going down the river, were never seen again. This is the 
only time Coyote has appeared since the end of the mythological age. About 
ten years ago he was reported to have been seen travelling in the Shuswap 
country, but some Kamloops Indians who took much interest in the matter 
ascertained it to be a false report. 
According to another version the canoe was of birch-bark and disappeared 
under water with all hands. The first to appear very early in the morning 
was Morning-Star, who rose to the surface and came ashore. At noon Sun 
rose and came ashore; and in the evening Moon rose, holding the canoe, and 
came ashore. During the night, the canoe and all disappeared. Yet another 
version mentions two bark canoes. One was like the Athapascan canoes, and 
the other was pointed on the waterline like the Thompson canoes. The 
former contained seven heavenly bodies, — sun, moon, morning-star, and 
others, said by some to be stars. This canoe went under water just below 
Lytton; and Moon, with the canoe, did not come up until evening. The other 
canoe contained seven transformers or mythological personages, — Coyote, 
Nri’kisentem, Kokwe'la, Old-One, Ntce’mka, Skwia’xenemuyx, and ‘nmu‘ipem. 
They went ashore and sat on a rock looking on until evening.   
} Compare Simon Frasec's Journal, pp. 184-187. This story may possibly be confused with a real tale of the moon. When the new moon appears with the whole disk dimly visible, the Indians the moon holding the cance.”   

----



----

