L - Chukcurr MyrroLoay. 
By Watoesar Bocoras. 
CONTENT! 
  Chukchee Texts +. + + + + «oes 
Loftoduction . «Lo. ooo see a 
IL Mythsand Tales . «o.oo eee © (The Aiwan Shamans) . . . . LLL... 2 (The Woman and the LakeSpiri) . . . . . . . . . . . 
i. 3. (The Girl and the Skall) . . . X 
4 (The Youth who received Supernatural Powers from the Kelet) | 5. (Contest with the Kelet). . . . Cee § (The Atwan and the Reindeer Breeder) © © | | 7. (The Visit of the Keller). . . 8. (The Child-Monster) . . . 9. (The Orphan) . - oo to. (Umqiqii's Adventure) . . a1. (The Adventures of the Brothers) . 13. (The Children carried away by a Giant) . . . . . . . . . . 13. The Raven and the Girls (Valvryfrhimaul) . . . . . . . . . 14. A Tale of the Raven Ku'urkil (Kwurkil Limi) . . . . . . . 15. A Story about a Polygamist (L¥milin Lima) . . . 16. (The Woman who married the Moon and the Ke'lg) . 17. (Battle with the Ta'nitt) oo 18. Two Shamans (Efe‘aultt fi'riq) . . . 19. (The Man who married a Sky-Girl) . 20. (The Man who visited the Polar Bears) . 21. (The Shaman and the Kelet) . . oo . . . . . . 
Ingo . Cee -. (Incantion on Behalf of a Sick Person). _ . . . . . . . . . 2. Pintail-Duck Incantation (Valo'k-'wgan, Yelke'kin Ewgan) (iad Anadyr Incantation) . . ANA 3. Incantation for taming Wild Reindeer (Qualva'tdwgan) . © . . © 
  4 (Incantation to ward off Kelet) . . . . . . .. . ... 5. Fortifying Incantation against the Coming of Ke'let (Tanoma'tkén VEWGAT) Lo oe 6. For Hunting SeaGame . . . . . . . .. . ...... 7. To Cure a Sick Man . . . NP 5. Incantation for Pains in the Stomach (Nanqutelkén &wgan) o. Incantation to bring back the Dying. . . 10. Incantation (used by) a Woman rejected by her Husband and Jealous of her Rival (F'wgan fieusqata uwa¥quéita &'nku limyo) . . 
(xl

----

CONTENTS, 
IV. Songs +... aaa. 
V. Proverbs, Riddles, Sopngs FE. 
Chukchee Tales. + . . . . . . 
I Creation Tales . . . . . . . . nL Raven Tale . . . . . . 2. The Hare Tale . . . . 3. Story of Raven and Wolverene 4. Raven and Owl . . 
IL Miscellaneous Tales . . . . . . 1. The Sacrifice to the Dead. . 2. The Rekkei . . . . 3. (The Re 4 (The Orphan) . . . . . . 4 (Story of Objector Loathing) © 6. (The Visitor) . . + . . . 7. (The Polygamist) . . . 8. (The Giant) . . . . 9. (Sacrifice to the Sea) . 10. (The Monster-Woman) 1. (Reindeer-Born) + +. 12, Tale about Qolénto’ 13. (The Girl in the Stone Ches) © 4. (The Girls as Avengers) . 
  TL War Tales... RE ©. Ma'né and Mans'qeon. © | © 2 (Qolénto) . . . 3. (War with the Tan) © . . 
IV. Tales of Russianized Natives . . . 1. (SeaJumper) . Lo... 2 (ReindecrBorn) . . . . . . 5 (Hae Story) . . «LL... 4 (Raven and SheFox) . . 5. (The Boy who married the Sun) 
  eer Breeder and the Ai'wan)

----

I. — INTRODUCTION. 
The following series of texts was recorded by me during the years 1900 
and 1901 in various villages on the Pacific Coast of the Chukchee Peninsula, between Mariinsky Post and Udi'sak. A number of tales are here given with 
interlinear translation and free translation. The attempt has been made to 
render the texts as accurately as possible, but it has been found necessary to 
omit in the translations many of the conjuctions and interjections which are 
quite numerous in Chukchee and which often appear in extended groups. 
Most of the tales have no native names. For these, titles indicating the 
contents have been added. All such titles are placed in parentheses. Only a 
few tales are named, like “The Raven-Tale,” “The Polygamist-Tale” and others. 
Words added in the translations for the sake of clearness are placed in 
parentheses. Literal translation of Chukchee words or phrases are enclosed 
in brackets. 
The following alphabet has been used for transcribing Chukchee sounds: — 
Vows. 
“i & a ° 
ie ao wu TE oa u € i, u. . . have their continental sounds (always long). + like 0 in nor. . obscure vowel (long). + obscure vowels (short). + like ¢ in del, but prolonged. . a diphtong with an accent on 4, .It always has a laryngeal intonation, <i. + between 0 and #, long. . posterior part of mouth in # position, lips in u position (short). Very long and very short vowels are indicated by the macron and breve respectively. “The diphthongs are formed by combining any of the vowels with 7 and u. Thus: LL like iin Aide. 
      foi dem i Cons oi choice. AW. ow how Consoxaxts. 
J a x a PE 
J & ¥ ¢ s on » m v L 1 
v y 
(31 5 JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

4 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
L....... asin German. Lo... .... posterior palatal 4 surd and exploded, the tip of the tongue touching the alveoli of the upper jaw, and the back of the tongue pressed against the hard palate. +. posterior palatal /, like z, but sonan. -. as in French. ++ dental with slight trill. +. as in English. +. palatized # (almost like ny with consonantic y).  . nasal consonant, with # position of tongue. +. as in English. + bilabial. a glottal stop. + velar g. as in English (used after & 1, 7). +. as in English. velar £. +. as in English. +. palatized (similar to dy and 4 with consonantic y). .. as in English. +... palatized (similar to sy with consonaatic 5). & ....... like English ch +. like English / in joy. & LLL... strongly palatized ¢, intermediate between # and i, but weaker than either. J un... strongly palatized J. YW... .. always consonantic.     
  The following additional symbols have been used: — 
I........ designates increased stress of articulation of the preceding consonant. ©... designates a full pause between two vowels: yic'a. is used to connect parts of compound words. 
  wkw (before and after #, — Aw) is pronounced as a compound sound. 
The lips are placed in # position, while is formed by the back of the tongue. 
In a similar way gu and go are often pronounced with a faint w sound 
between consonant and vowel. 
1 terminal and unaccented is often pronounced with a slight nasal sound. 
In a few cases w in the beginning of the word is also pronounced with 
a nasal sound. No additional signs have been used to indicate the nasal 
character of these sounds. 
i (consonantic 3) between vowels is generally omitted or pronounced 
very faintly. 
77 when preceded by the vowels ¢ and # almost always loses its consonantic 
character and becomes i For instance: geilqiin instead of ge-yrlqitin. 
The terminal sound is often modified by the initial sound of the following 
word, according to certain phonetic rules. These will be given in a discussion 
of the Chukchee grammar. Owing to the slowness of speech necessary for 
writing from dictation many such changes have disappeared in the texts as 
taken down by me. I have thought it advisable to leave these cases uncor- 
rected. 1 have written for instance correctly: fier relu®firtki, instead of w'fiel

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 5 
relu¥iutkr, in accordance with the rule that terminal / before » changes to 7. 
But in another case I have left me¢’mil ra'nmignén. 
In contrast to the Koryak, the Chukchee language has hardly any dialects 
to speak of. This is probably due to the mobility of the tribe and to the 
frequent intermarriages between the Reindeer and Maritime branches of the 
tribe. Among the Koryak such intermarriages are quite rare, There exist 
some differences in the vocabularies of the Kolyma and Pacific coast regions. 
Several words that are used on the Pacific coast, — particularly south of the 
Anadyr River, — are found also in the Koryak language. The Reindeer 
people of the Kolyma know their meaning, but usually employ other words, 
which are in turn known, though not commonly used, on the Pacific coast. 
The people of the Arctic villages speak faster and harsher than the Reindeer 
Chukchee of the inland. 
The pronunciation of women differs from that of the men. They use 
in most cases instead of & an s, and instead of # (particularly after soft 
vowels) 5. They also use instead of ## and & the double 8. Contracted 
forms of words are never used by women. Men, for instance, say nitvaqenat, 
or nitva’qaat. Women say only mitva’qénat. The sounds & and » are of 
frequent occurrence in Chukchee, so that the female speech with its recurrent 
§ sounds quite peculiar, and is not easily understood by an iniexperienced ear. 
The women are not by any means unable to pronounce & and # like men; and in tales, when quoting a man’s words they use the male pronunciation. 
But in ordinary conversation the male pronunciation is considered as unbe- 
coming a ‘woman. 
Specimens of female pronunciation will be found in a few songs of the 
Reindeer Chukchee of the Kolyma, all of which belong to women. 
A few songs, proverbs and word games (“fast speeches”), taken down 
among the Reindeer Chukchee of the Kolyma® have been incorporated in this 
collection. These songs are not mere improvisations, like most of the songs 
of the Reindeer Chukchee, since I heard some of the words repeated many 
times without change. 
Proverbs are quite few and undeveloped. Iam not sure even that these 
phrases are proverbs in the strict sense of the term, though they are fairly 
generally known and used in stereotyped form. Word games are in use 
among children, just as those of Europe. Those given here are well known 
also on the Pacific coast.   
+ See Bogoras, Chukchee Materials pp. 144-146.

----



----

II. — MYTHS AND TALES. 
1. (The Ai'wan Shamans.) 
Once in olden times, the Ai'wan and the people of St. Lawrence Island 
were at war. One man from this shore met with misfortune through the 
wind. While on the icefields he was carried away and spent two months on 
the icefields. One day there was a fog, and no land was to be seen. Then 
he heard the roaring of walrus. Still he remained with head drawn back 
into his coat. Then he was visited by another man, by a shaman, who found 
him sleeping on [the surface of] the ice and awakened him. “Oh, how won- 
derful, you are here?” The other one looked up and, indeed, he wept aloud. 
The shaman said, “Do not weep! A settlement, though of St. Lawrence 
people, is quite near.” 
Then, suddenly, they saw it. They came ashore. A number of houses 
were there. The people were clad in bird-skin clothes. Those of St. Lawrence 
Island are also Ai'wan, their language being the same. They took hold of 
  
Tele ¢nmen Ai'wan Eri Eiwhue'n niqalititqinet. Wo'tii-notanqa'tkén 1 Inodeo once  Afwin they Sulummnce  werestww One fm land side ines (and) Mand people his yoya leale'wu gelgiin.  Gelgélgupu genletesin, amen qol yilgm getlalin by be fore wrong vase Among silts be was amis dh mors ha been 8 he a, “pen gilgelrtdank, amen yine's, va'névan ninutewurre‘erkmen. | ¥nmen rikaital on he ceelds, sad then ogame, noingatall land is seen. Then wales roucog walo'mnén, mignopitva’qén, Enfin in‘étku. Enqa'm quetiini yopa'nnén bebe, hermit, Gn psc Thea by sober hewn vied 
efieinld, gelgelrthanik yrlqalin riggeu'nin, “Gu tite'fieti-gir! Wu'tku nitvai 5 bya chaman_on the semic top seeping he awakened him, “Ob wonder ar thon! Hews stages: gr’ Enmen licpgi. Gu, len terga'tyd’. I'wkwi® ¥'niot, *Ate'rgatka, Gout Then belooked Ob, eo booed Hespoke ths Doooiem nimnim vai &'méeqdi va'rkin, Eiwhue'n qa man hrs qe sony SeLavioce doh? 
    Wit¥tku nelurkin. Ripest. E'nmen yarati Ga'lgén om evimt, i'mt, 
Then ooly they saw it. They came And then houses Of binds dresses, conts, 
galga-naThin. Gik, e'nmen iim Ai'wanat im ne'miqii. Eiwhue'lit Enna’n 
bird.skin, Ob, and there the Atwan also. St.Lawresce the same inhabitants 
tm valm yilil. E'nmen nepiriitmet, milo’ nepirinet Enqa'n fi'raq 10 being lioguge. Thea they cunght them, all they tookthem those two 
[1

----

8 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
the strangers, they took captive those two men. They bound the shaman, the 
other one they killed with a drill, having perforated his head at the crown. 
After that they set free the shaman, intending to keep him as a slave. 
He passed there only one night. When they were about to go to slecp, 
he went out and shouted toward the sea, calling the walrus spirit. Immediately 
from afar came the walrus. Oh, oh, the walrus came. Indeed, they were 
(as numerous) as sand. He walked along over their heads and went away. 
Then also the walrus which he had passed would come up in front. An old 
male walrus said, “Oh, now we are nearing the land. Your people arc eager 
to pursue us. Oh, therefore some of us are going away. It seems that your 
people are bad” Oh, he said to two walrus, two year old ones, “Let us 
carry away our guest” By one of them he was made to sit on its body, 
and it dashed on, plunging along. The old walrus, the one that was most 
clever, followed it (like a leader). When one walrus got tired, he was made 
to sit on the other one. 
When night came, they found a floe of seaice. The old walrus said,   
orawétat.  EAcaiin nelpinityi'n, gol tm na‘nmirkin, amen ra'yipi laut pa Shaman bond, thao they ile, Den vthadsl on bad Kano'tianguph na'nmua'n, | Enqu'm ein tm nerriThan, purely nal on cowetop they Mlldbim, Then shaman Shey setbim rey Gor asheve they hiiifio’a®n. 
Segan to hae hi. Li'en qune’te ki'wkwi®. E'¢hi yilqd'tyit, ganto’lén, rrrkaka’la eifieu'nin, 
Only one me be pueda Deore they slop, he has gone walrusspii he called him, 
     sight. outs anqa’g eife’utkni’. E'nmen Iuw'ur yaai'pii ye'ty rivki. Ka'ko, ka'ko, ¢'nmen tothe sen he called. Then even fom afi came walrus. Oho, oho, then 
ri'rkt ge'pliLin. E'nmen ami qinu’r qun nute’s qn. E'nmen lautitkina’ta 
walrus Then cerwinly like ju Then on the heads-top 
Fefwatkat, ewkwe'tyi®. E'nmen eur pbla’yo ritki a'tto'ota ninclqin. Kitve Be walked, | he went away. Theo abo the lt walrus inthefont became. Byasold 
yuta iunin: “Gik, a'men dm ELo'n, notas'qa’'wkwe’. Tu'rgin tm re’mkin 
walrus Be was told: “Oh, Howerer, and approached. Your people 
miggingin merbqa'gu. Gua, amén im Eon, &rmqik pela‘arkm, qditiun for us. however, some ae Jeaviog, it seme 
     tirgin re‘mian eg" Gud, pi'nvarrerkat firiq Teminet: -Gug, men tm ow people tad" Ob, woyemwold wins two hessidiothems “Ob, however, mimnmle’d'n re'mkilmn.” Quttiind uwéke'tkintk rifielkiwe’nnin, En°fi'n’ im fan 
ltwscamy away tho gue” Bp ome of on the body he was made to sit thus at 
    
fe spon, mpiu'riqin. Enqa’m snqa'n kitve'yu gitte’piém len mimaena‘qen. Qol tim ne hed on Then Ga old wins Gemosclover oly followed. Plunging. nipe’fietqin, Enra’q quttiini nibelqiugin. is red, then ‘upontheother the sits upon. 
Nites, guq gilgil nelw'n. Kitve'yu wk, “Gu, re/mkmn iiti‘wkwit. Mion! Oh, Epis beyond OW wane tks, Oh, thepeope re td

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 9 
“Oh, all the people are tired. Let the people go to sleep.” They put the 
man on [the surface of] the sea-ice. The old walrus said to the man, “Oh, 
you may sleep on [the surface of] the sea-ice. We will sleep by your side 
on the water.” They inflated the crops on their throats and floated on the 
water like bladders. In due time the old walrus awoke. “Now let the people 
go along. Oh, my! you must be hungry.” — “Oh yes!” said the man. It 
was still dark. The old walrus dived to the bottom of the sea and saw 
something like the [motionless star] Polar Star. He bent over it and it proved 
to be a shellfish. The little man was fed with those shellfish. They were 
quite warm and even hot. Probably the walrus cook them secretly, therefore 
they may have been hot. 
They set off and moved on till midnight. The old walrus said, “It seems 
we are nearing land.” They moved on, and before the land was near, the 
dawn came. “Oh, you must be hungry again.’ — “Oh yes!” The walrus 
again plunged down. This time he brought some shellfish of oblong shape. 
  
  Re'mkin niyrlqityd'n.”  Gélrtkmik ora'wéian neifes'n. Rrrki Enqam The people lt them sleep” On thesniceiop the man they patupon. Thewalrus then enqa’n, kitve'yu funin qla’ul, *Guk, git tim geltkinik qayrlqatyf®, eur mu'ri that old walrus. sd to theman, “Oh, thou on. the pemice thou sleep, and we 
vai gumikqa's mirreyYlqatys® mémlftantk.” Paggoht tm nettu'net piThikin, EE AE 
Endin Wen &k girgol gene'Linet, qanu pe'welti Kutve'yun Taye whit. tus oven quite on High they became, lke bladdem. OM warms awoke. “A’men am re‘mkin newkwe'tya'n. Guq, ma‘nkén dm giete‘wkwi'? — *Gug, “However people let them go'away. Oh, my! ouwthungry? — On, 1" Qla'ulqai iwkwi. Wusqiméku. Rukanpma’éhm litve'yun €nmen yest® Thelitleman said. Ta the dark. Wars old man old wars then pilqd’erkin, kalté'ts, ilwkil-afa'uihin gite'nin, te/qdi’, — e'nmen tamona'Thm dived © the moonless sar he sawi, he bent then a bivalve shell bottom oh — rpmtikew'nin.  E'nmen qla‘ulqai riqamitva’urkinén temunetd; ¢‘nmen qinu’r be made sppear. Then  litleman was made to est with shellich; then ms if qun niciite’rugin, mthrlqinet ya¥rat. E‘tim vai mipa'tqénat vén-va’k rrrkata, they wamed, | hotones vey. Puobably  teycookedthem secrely by the we wiry qanu’r qun nithrlqinet. it hot ones. 
Gik ewkwe'tyi't. Emgmunnkiti nelyt. Kitvevun iwkwi, “Etim On they went away. Midaight became, OM wal sid, I seems nutenut minnei'meukwd'n.”  Guq, ¢nmen tm tle’, thi eime'wkwi’, fothecath we are spproachiog” Ob, then they | before it approsched 
Irgiro'afiol.  “Guq, amen tm yakankm ne'me gitte'wkwi'? — Guq, 11” dawn began. “Oh, however, © probably spin onsthuogy? — Ob,  yesl* 10

----

10 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
He ate again. “Now we are going to leave you. As soon as we shall see 
a floe of sea-ice, though a small one, we shall leave you on it.” Then they 
saw one. “Well, your people will be here this [dawn] morning. We are 
beginning to feel afraid” They put him on the ice. “Oh, what are you 
doing, you are leaving me alone.” — *It is quite certain, that they will come.” 
Then he was told by the walrus, “When you are overtaken by sleep, 
roar like a walrus, when you are going to sleep.” Then the walrus dashed on, plunging on the way. They went away, very far to the open sea. Soon after 
that he began to be overtaken by sleep. So he roared like a walrus and 
immediately turned into one. 
When the dawn of the day came, some people approached in a boat and 
began to move along towards him. Beforc they were too near, he awoke. 
Just when the bowman was going to throw the harpoon, he said, “Oh, what 
  are you going to do unto me? — “Oh, dear! Is it not wonderful? You 
have become a walrus, and we came near killing you. Oh, whence did you 
come back? — “Truly, it is bad. We come from a settlement of men. 
  
Neme tpl mivq ederelon vat teminer. Neme qunrta. “Gk Amin bo plunged; this me the oblong formed shells heme con, cron, merapslnogt. Melfi gllghati mime lun naphrgin. #aks mira: hee, wear ig to le Avsomas 8 sevice we alse 6 smal ns, there wel 
  péla’git” on. quilbmanget tm nel, “Guq, amen Gm ELO'n wo'tn- Teave thee” indeed teysawit, Ob, wel there on this irgiro’k tt gin re'mkn q#ifun relqri, mitaqalefio’tn.” Guq, enmen fiei'pei'n. Gwn your people it seems will come we begin tobe Ob, then they put him (on the water), afraid.” on. 
“Gu, titefet-tu’ri, enapelarkme’tik.” — *Guq, amen 4m gu'ni, repkirgd®.” “Oh, wonder you are, you are leaving me.” — “Oh, however certainly, they will come.” 
E'ur rirka'ta {unin, “E'ur yrlqi narayo-git, muru'wmil qaifei yrlqannok.” And bythe Bows “And by the wit be thou inoulikeness roar going to sleep” Vis lds when deep overtaken E'nmen piri’, ga'nqan, gino'nétr rrki newkwe'tqin. E'nmen yilqd nayo'n- Then he dubed thee (very to themidde the go away. Tha by the beeps on plunging, fa, walrus Seep fod", rirka'mél cifie’¥, yilq'tyi®, Iw'ur rirka'ne gene’vin. i eho bern, help, 120 the ml ebcae ken, Rhea Eur ggrontaten, avttwili meamitaqin. Eh cimewhwitt, kiyewkot, Thea owiniahe ews by te bouts he ws ipso foe ey approche he awoke. 
  E'nmen ¢thi revrile. te’grarkinin, hur £ Fwkwit, *Guq, inenreqeurkinik” — Then before bythebow: he was fung at, then he sid, “Ob, what are you ging to do man (With th Bacon), only lm “Guk, ma‘nkén, im kimek. TiteAetigi, rrkane nine'li “On, surprise] almost. Wonder art thou, tothe walrus become at thon. Almost mit‘amunt. Gu, m¢ako li‘mia prntiqityi®? — “EVtqi, “tk im qai've mm- we killd thee. Ob, whence again thou sppemest? — ‘Itisbad, well indeed 
     
   

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. : in 
My companion, however, is not with me. Those people are wrong-doers. 
They drilled through his head and killed him.” He entered the house. “Oh, 
what news? — “Truly, it is pitiful. Evil-doers are those people.” 
The summer came. They went to war, the men of Usii'sak, and probably 
from every neighboring settlement a number of boats assembled. Then a 
large company of boats set off. All boats were overloaded (with warriors). 
Before they were too near, they saw a cluster of houses of the St. Lawrence 
people standing on the seashore. In the rear of the houses was a bay of 
St. Lawrence Island; there actually a large part of the boatsmen went 
ashore. They walked along in the fog from the rear, just out of sight of the 
islanders. Then an old man, one of the crew said, “Oh, howl like wolves!” 
They had not been seen by the St. Lawrence people and they were not 
expected by them. Now, when they uttered their howls, another old man, 
one from St. Lawrence Island, said, “Oh, now they are coming.” The young 
men said, “But we are on an island.” — “Give answer to them!” So they 
  
  ormgopy nrpkirmuri. E'wkurga tumgitum uid E¥tgi, nileuleugin. fm omebwe Mowe comin fsa lishd gh « sotement E*tqi emJeu’tik ri’yipi na'nmua'n.” E'nmen resqiwkwi’. *Gik, ra%prau?® Mistad spo thehead wins thyllldbin’ Then hemmed Ob, what dogs” — 
“Lien tm i*tk e“tqi, mvittt'irgm. Etqi, nite’rmetingin ramkr'yim.” “nly indeed itisbad, object of com lished doing violeace people big” ebb E'nmen ¢lerui, ¢nmen mnno’rkin, meffin fian, uirim tm, tim am Then  smmer then gotows, who now, peopleofUlliaky probably 
ge'mge-nute’qin a¥ttwiln genumekeulin. E'nmen a'ttwilY mkichin qati. E‘nmen fom every land boatmen © gathered. Then bosumen large west. Avd nering geifierulin.  E’chi ¢'nmen cime'wkwa't, Eiwhue'n a‘qa-to’rmuva’lin yara'wkun. (heboasywere Before then they approached, St. Lawrence (on the) seashore being houses clue, Grerlonied with peopl). ; E'nmen yarau“ltha’nlinqaé-va'lin ke'fiigvin Eiwhuekin, £n°qa’m i‘ppe mitkitr'ydin Tien (p09) (omieotie boisg ty ofS Lawaie ten stl more panes roy ie tan a%ttwilin im qa'ptenqaé gata'len yinelk lilefu'rmits, mpma‘chin {wkwi® boatimen (fom) te rer eymovd intieog (0 00 dg Om wa 
a'ttwile’kin, “Guq, ei*mil qaqo®la’tik I” Lufi-lu”ti e'nmen nr'ntiginet, rat-hema’un 
from the boats “Oh, wolflike howl!" Not seen then they had them, uakvown 
Eiwhueli. E'ur tm qoYlaroa’t, Aiwhuanpina’éhiqai 
  in, “Gik, ripe’t dm bytheStLaw. Then - they howled St Lawrence old man small said, OB, even rence people. oud, 
¢un”  Aa'tekit gi‘ulinet, “Gu, efiet um ili%d-muTi” — “Qita'Libgitkrl® 
Young men said, “Ob since, islanders sre we.” — Give answer!” 
      
3—JSSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VILL.

----

12 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
roared like walrus. Then the old man, one of the boat's crew, said again, 
“Oh, where are you? Now they have become our quarry.” 
The larger part, those who had landed in the rear (of the houses), were 
still unknown to the St. Lawrence people. Those from St. Lawrence island 
hid by the seashore. But those from the boats attacked them from the rear and a slaughter ensued. The St. Lawrence women were already strangling 
themselves from mere fright. The others, at the same time, were mincing a 
large quantity of walrus blubber with their kitchen-knives, (preparing a meal 
for the victors). It was a great slaughter. Many St. Lawrence women were 
put on board the boats and brought over here. 
Some years passed. The fourth year, the St. Lawrence people went to 
war. They landed in the nighttime and found the people sleeping. So they 
started to murder them, thrusting their spears from outside under the outer 
tent-cover, all around the sleeping-room, and stabbing the sleepers. A small 
orphan child hid himself somewhere near the house, while they were still killing   
E'nmen rrka'mél eifie’d’t. E'nmen a‘ttwile’kin mpma’thm i'wkwi®, “Gu, 
  Then  wilmslke theyrowed. Then fom the bosts Lod mn sid, Oh, meaki nitturi? ELo'm ginniku nellyd't.” where wre you? Now tothe quany they became.” Ippe yaaliiat fipellin Eiwhue'li ge'mu riflhigin mukiém. E‘nmen Actually (fom) the rear landingone by the St without were held more namerows. Then Jae Lavin comics people afiqa-¢o’rmi gana’ctalén Eiwhue"ora’weran. Attwild yaalimqatai'pti gaptnfilén by the shore 5 emis S.Lovrege men. By the bt fim the se ie toy wee 
na'qam, ganmitkoi'vulén. Eiwhue'e’ut milhi'pqinct am-a’yilha, enmen qu'tti however, they were slaughtered. St. Lawrence-women they strangle from mere fight, snd others themseives kopa'lhm naala'tkogénat. E‘nmen nanmitkoi'vun. Kako eusqit geinelin wilur- are mincing with knives. Then sasghter. Oho, women have been Hubber loaded (on ne bose)   
ni'mkigin, Eiwhuefc’ut fa'nko gere’Linet. merous St. Lawrence women bere have bee, brought. Ne'me te'ée-h giiwi®, fira’éa giwikinek Eiwhue'ln garfnnolén. E’nmen Min Sowmers ayer onthe years puting Sulewmse weet to wan The times passed, fourth people 
niki'ti gempelin.  Yrlqilin gayo¥len re'mkimn. E'nmen vai poiga ronmépu in he hey laded Sleeping they found the people, Then with he from under sighviime pear the outer on ovr Iten nitinpiéttqenat yorow'tikamlé'li Rargmoi’pii. En'qa’m yei'velqdi ‘chi only they stibbed them Meeping- all around from without, Then orphan small before 
qolera’gtr qa'tys't, &'mqik, €hi Enqan nrnmiqén ora‘wétan yrlqiln Eiw- ‘sober howe they went, tome | before there  wermkiled men decpiog by hue'ld, ¢nmen nikek ga'térlén, ra’g-fo’rmik, maalit tm geniggewgu'ulinet. StLawreace then somewhere Beconceled on the house. | neighbors he awsheaed them all pies primey pote 
o 
10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 13 
some of the sleepers, and before they had time to go to another house. He 
awakened all the neighbors. They rushed out. Then those from St. Lawrence 
Island fled to the open sea. Two men staid behind on the ice-floe. 
They lived on the ice-floe. Before the strong winds of autumn began 
to blow, they came to steal some meat and so were taken captive. “Oh, 
we will not kill you” They, however, struggled on, not heeding these words. 
The next night, they stole some warm clothes and departed again. They 
went away together over the seadice, they walked along over the newly- 
frozen sea. The ice was salt and yielded under every step. 
‘Then they came. to the shore. A St. Lawrence old man asked them, 
sWell, what kind of men are the land-people?” — “Oh, they are deucedly 
good” — “Oh, Oh” said the St. Lawrence old man, “Now let the (two) 
people become friendly to each other.” 
Summer came again. “Oh well, now let the people set off.” Then the 
people of St. Lawrence Island came over here. They brought a quantity of 
  
Gantofa'lén. E'nmen amt gegmtewleet Eiwhuelt tmi-anqa’gtr, gelrtkmik They rood ow. Thea Wey fd those of SL. to the middle fet, on the sence Toweace or fi'riq gapelalénat. 
two (men) they have ft. 
E’nmen a'iqak nimitva‘qénat gilgilik, tw'wkik. ‘chi ¢‘nmen niyo‘oreqén, Then onthesea they lived onthe onthe Before then strong wind was, senice, icefoe. 
nitulelqiuginet také'ehets, qinv&r enmen nepirinet. “Guq, qarém mintn- they came to seal for meat, and 10 they were taken. *Ohy not we will mink” E'nmen  aa’lomkrlénat nikamagra’kénat. E'nmen  qolé’-tke’unvuk Kilyou® Then not heeliog nes strggling cues. Then on another seeping ewkwelerkit, eviti getuleTeet. E'nmen ewkweltyst. Enmen geteuki, they go away, cloding theyhavestolen, Then they west awsy, Then together, géletkma'ta.  E'nmen vai mideivutku'qinet tur-qi'tlin a'fiqa, e'nmen e‘mkin- ng hc sevice Ten boy asd Gates en te sem 
te'ntik qinu’r qun gilgil ni'tqin, te'yugil, mmlilagin te'ntik. PO aie wie sltsewicn, cc to teading. E'nmen fipe’at. Guk, Aiwhuyanpina’éha pinlo‘nénat, Amo? em-nu/fréin Then thy came Oh, byasiLawreaceoldman they wereasked, “Well? the land people 
  miki nrtvagén? — “Gua, ¢“tqi nimelqin” — “Guq, amen tm re‘mkin Bow theyre? — Oh badly goed”  — Ob, wil then the people nitumge’wkwi'n.”  Aiwhuyanpinathi'yfim gi'ulin. let hem become fendly.” St. Lawrence oldmanbig sad. E'nmen ¢lerui. *Guq, amen tm re/mkin nrlgityi'n.” E'nmen fa'nko Then summer “Oh willow the people let them go Then here 
i¥rgi® re'mkin Eiwhue'lm. U’kkim e'nmen geifiei'vulin, i‘'me-ri”nut, répa’lhm. 
crosied the people thatof Su. Law. (Wooden) then they put many whatsoever,  walruschide. over rence Tila vessels (ato the boats),

----

14 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
wooden vessels, walrus hides, everything they had. They landed and the 
people became friends. So they distributed their vessels among our people. 
An old man from this side said, “Indeed, what will you give as return presents?” 
The visitors were clothed in bird skins. What kind of skins are these? — 
“Reindeer-skins.” — “And what is a reindeer?” Then they showed them the reindeer-muzzles. They examined them. They said, “Oh, thus they are; like 
the holes in a boat cover} (namely in the walrus-hide cover, all along the 
border). Now then, eat some of the meat!” They cooked fat meat. Oh, 
just like blubber!” They ate of it. “Oh, oh, quite exquisite!” 
After that they went away. One man was left. He was a shaman, and he was treated just like the former one (i. €. he was bound). When winter came, 
they set him free. The shaman had a sledge. So he departed in the night- 
time. He was hauling the sledge loaded with walrus-blubber. He moved on 
until he felt tired. It was full moon. At that time he was overtaken by 
another shaman, one from the western country. That shaman also was hauling 
a sledge. The former heard only a noise above; that western shaman was 
  
Gik, e'nmen firpe’d't. ELo’n re'mkin tumge'wkwi®. A’ni, geilitkoi'vulin u’kkdm. 
   
  Oh, then theylunded. Then the people became iendly. So, they distributed veel Wotinqa'tkén mpina’éhm i'wkwi®, “Gk, qailo’kim re‘qa® qata’vifitki”  E'nmen From this side od mam wid, Ob, relly withwhat wil you smewer? Then galhen i'n. Neha mlprnfigénat. E'nmen gi'u nrlhaqinet nelhit. “Rano Dirt skin) clothes. Skins they gave them. Then unknown they bad the skins, “What teh lymfa? — “Qo'ren nelhn® — “Mifikri valit qaat? Qinve’r, srobes) agua? — ‘Reindeer skis’ — How being reindeer” Aer that vamilqalhin nankaléro’wkwa'n. E‘nmen nimdietuwugin. Ni‘uginet, “Kako dees) lip they showed Then they were inspecting. They mid, “Oho, mei! mike valt. Qinur a¥ttwukin pu'ttiet”! — “A'ni qunum, te'kichin there! how beiog ones. Like boats holes” — New then, met qinvutki” E'nmen natipa’tinat. “Kako mei! qanu’r mitkrydit” Enmen at it” And they cooked ft. %Obo thers! lke  blabber bigs Then nenunet. “Kako mei, ya'rat nite'nqinet.” Deystcit, “Oho there, very good ones” Enqa’'m ewkwe'tyd't. Qol gapélaén eneilin er‘wmil. E'nmen lflenru’®!, Thea they went away. Some has ben left shanao to ter(former) Then winter came, 
nerri‘lha®n,  Efie‘atlin, naga’'m go'rgulén. E'nmen newkwe'tqin nikita. O'rgoor theysethimfice, Shaman, however, wih s sledge, Then he went sway fu themight, Sledge nine’metqin kopa'lha getinefielin. E'nmen nile’qin nilvauqen Ergipya'lheti.   
  being with wes lone. Then he moved, he was trod with the bright 
E'nmen eigrs-qeneila ga’yolén qolenotaipu. Ne'maqai Enga'n ederim Then  byawesterashaman he was over. from another land. Alo that shaman taken.   
1 The skin of a reindeer-head with its eye-holes and nostrils resembles fn a way the walrus-hide covering of the skin-boat, with its holes around the edge. The resemblance lies in the appearance of the holes. 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 15 
flying along. On both sides he had long knives, which he uscd as wings. 
The other shaman who was hauling the sledge was startled and fled. When 
he was approached by the other one, just on his arrival, he also fled up with 
his sledge. Still, the other one was about to overtake him. Before he could 
catch up with him, (the other onc) dived under ground, only the sledge 
remained there on the ground. Oh, the other one was unable to pursue him, 
the western shaman. 
Then he sat down. “Oh, oh, oh; indeed; indeed! Not without reason 
was he talked about. Really I am much interested in seeing you.” It seems 
that shaman was called Ke'mneku! “No shaman from any country whatso- 
ever can vanquish me” Then Ke'mneku spoke to the ground downward. 
“Nevertheless you have frightened me. I thought you were a kele. Now 
come here.” He appeared. Give me your necklace. Let me give you this 
knife in exchange.” — “No, I do not want to give it to you” — “Then I 
  
ipe’gumet. E'nmen Iu'ur grrgola‘ta wifrgirgithin walo'mnén. Enqa'n eigr'siq- 1 
  nulinga sledge. Thea only on high noise'the he heard That western 
efie’filin rifie’td nile’qin, éuluwa’lat r'lhe nine'lhaqin falhil. Enqa’n efie/filin 
shamsn fying moves, long knives forwings he bas on both That shaman 
  sides. (other) 
pegtme’tln geteditite’ta gegrnteulin. E'nmen vai reimeunin quttiing, ¢‘nmen 
   Acdgebanling acting up (fom has fed awsy. Thea he was ap by the other then ht) proached one, 
ne'magii gerielin puké‘riiok Eniiin’ go'rguma. E'nmen yoAfionén. E'¢hi so has fownup on becoming us Wb Gedelge Thea ho bogm tobe Before overtaken. 
péréadontn, nute’sqi gelipetin, len ofrgoor Eki nute’sqak platy’. 5 hecoudbe ken, into the fe has dived, only the sedge there onthegnnd remained.   
  pote Gik, qol Enqa'n velerhalek luwa'wkwé® ee’milin, eigrs-q-ene/fln. Oh, suotbrthatone pure coud not shaman | westemabaman. Enmen wa'qed". *Egegegei'l Qailna get. Ka'ko. Aum nfrgipa’gén. Then  hesstdown, “Dh ah oh! Indesd. Oho. (uit vs kd 
Gund, pegtifiu tlhegit” Tiwkwi'k #niot, enmen Enqan Ke'mneku! Realy, imterst Ihadintee”  Dscems hus, then thatone Kemah. “Kako, Ke'mneku, ge'mgenu'te-ede’fli eve enpikuwkili-im’ Enmen “Oho, Kemneks, (irom) avery land by shamans mot 1am not vanquished” Then nute’s'qéin Enfa’q nuwéthau’qén Ke'mneku. “A’mmam &'wkurga ginentediittew- 10 to the ground _ there spoke Kemaeka. “However fast given me fright igit. Mit kelei-git. Keto qiye'tyi'l”  Pintiqatyl. “E¥nnchin im (hon. thought elmart thou. come” He sppeaied. (Thy) necklace qineilhity" eigt's q-che’nili nts gnatqén. E'te alimalaukelén. “Pura man Give me’ bymbewestemsbaman it isasked. | Not he is not heeding. “For exchange let wo'tqan vale miilhr” — “Go, qarém miilhit” — “Meti'u nereTh-im. Mis knife megiveihen® — Ob, mot Iwill give <Usbalied I shal be by i hee” — them.   
  * This passage is not clear. The namstor did not kaow exactly what cach shaman did.

----

16 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
shall not be believed. Please, do give it to me.” — “No, I won't” — “Then 
I will give you this big knife. Please, give me your necklace.” Then they exchanged their (assistant) spirits. And the other one gave 
him the necklace. He gave him the knife. The western shaman said to the 
other one, “Now then, move about with the knives.” All at once the other 
one moved upwards in this manner. Then Ke'mneku said, after they had 
exchanged even their bodies, “Well, now put on the necklace; go away and 
fly up, just as I did. You will fly up, then sink down to the ground and 
plunge in" The other one flew up. Then, slowly moving he fell down, 
plunged into the ground, but (when he was in as far as) the middle of his 
body, he stuck fast. “Oh, I have been unable to do it. Give me your wrist- 
bands!” — “I will not give them to you” — “Then I will give you the 
tassel from my back. It is my tail, my guide in motion.” 
Then he consented. The western shaman said to him, after the tassel 
had been given [then he said to him), “Well now, fly up just as I did” He   
Qaive qine/ilhi®” — *Guq, amen qarém!” — “Uri maifuwa’l miilhrr.  Gik, Rely geome’ — Ob bowen (miu) _ tSothn bighuie Lwillgne Ob or hed amen im qai've #nnithin qine'ilhi.® rally necklace give(tome.” Enfa’q ¢nmen ELon ened nelpuurctkurkm. E'nmen qinve’r yrlnin. Now then with (their they changed between Then after that he gave (i) assistant) spirits themselves. to him. 
Enqa’m vale yrlnin, en°qa‘m eigl's'q-ehe’ali 'unin, “A’niqun qrilu'tkui vala'ta.” Then the hegueit, now by ihewsstemnshaman he was “Now then move shout with the aife spoken tor Faves E'nmen 2'nikit rilu'tku wri girgola’gtt. Enqa’'m Kemneku'na {unin. £0'n Then  allatonce he moved thus upward. Tea by Kemneku hewsstald, Then ¥nqa’n uwi’kit nilpuure’tqinet. *Kita’'m qun, &¥anithin qai‘ptigun, qgte’wkwit, Gebodies they exchoged. Well now, meckace patos fy sway, qrifei* muru'wmil. Enqa'n rerified, nota’s'qétr qeretyi®, qretpen init!”  Gik, yw  Wkeme The thouwwil fo the goud fll down, ty to pling Ob, Cohen) By up, Toto So ¢nmen rife". E'nmen a’un-ula’gtt ere'tyl!, Spey, gmo'nétr uwa'®'. “Gug, Gea he flew up. Then  withslow he fll | planged by themiddle he suck Oh, ovement downy @ribe ody) (end ope). ulva‘wkwa'k. Ming¥lgit qineilhit” — *Guq, a'men tm qart’m mi‘ilhit.” Toonid not. Weistbands give me’  — “Oh, however aot will give thee” — “Uwifi, gomnin pénakalhin miilhir qe'ptikin. Pekirgirel gimnin, tilekin “Sothen, my tassel Luillgive from the Tail of mine, of motion ‘thee ck. 
  gitte’kaun.” ide” 
Guq, enmen valomga®. Eigrsqefefla i‘unin; penakaThin yrlnin. Ob, then he heard him. Byihe western sbaman he was tassel he gave spokento; ‘in. 
E'nmen {unin, *Kita'm qun, gémuwmil rindi” E'nmen rific® nan ini’. Then Bewastold, “Well now, | lkeme yup Then hefewsp himself

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 17 
[himself] flew up and just went up clattering. The shaman from St. Lawrence Island said to the other one, Well, now it is your tum.” He gave him the wristbands. “You will fly up, then you will fall down again and plunge into the ground” Then the western shaman flew up. Slowly moving he fell down. Then he plunged into the ground and was submerged as in water. After a while he reappeared. He said, “Oh, oh, indeed; Ke'mneku is talked about. How is it now? I am unable (to pursue him). Sill before this in my own mind I thought I could hardly be pursued by anyone. Oh, oh, truly; Ke'mneku has been talked about. How is it now? You have vanquished me. Oh, let us go away” Then the western shaman flew up. They were travelling at night. In one night they travelled flying through every land. 
Ke'mneku said. “I am going away.” The western shaman came home. He said to his companions, “I saw a shaman from St. Lawrence Island. 1 was unable to follow him.” — “You lie” — “Indeed, it is true.” — “Well then, what kind (of a shaman) was he?" He showed the necklace. “This is his necklace” — “You lie. You have   
E'nmen len wirgirge'tyl”. Eiwhuel {unin qol, “Gi, ginfa’q” Mmngelgit And ony  hecaiemd By atof bewas the Oh thousow!  Welhans immense sparen va ole aot yrlninet.  “Gik, rerifies, ne'me qertyl, nota’sqetr qatipetyi®” E'nmen begetben. ‘Oh (shmjor gin fll daw, imotbepmmd phoge dorm” Toes wilt by up, rift cigrsqeiealm.  Enmen auntlagum ere'tyf. E'nmen Sipetylf, fewup western shaman. Then wibdowmoton beflldown. Thea heplungedin, naga’m li'miia qanu’t memltkou'tr ergewe’tyi®. Prntiqatyi®. I'wkwi® Endo't, we spin lke into the var hewissbmerged He spewed Heid so, “Ka'ko, Ke'mneku, qailhma’nget nrrgipatqén. Re“qu limi? Kilew mil: “Oho, | Ke'maeks, indeed © hewsstliedabort, How is it ow? Tofollow va'wkwa'n. A'mEn dt gimu'w-iimguti a'qa’rkila geneliim. Ka'ko, qail- would not be Bat before in my own mid badly to be | have become, Oho, ; orned hina'n'get nirgipa’tqén, Ke'mneku. Re¥qu limha? inetenmpilkuun. Gug, indeed be wi talked about, Ke'macka. How is it now? thou hast well van OB, ‘ished me. men Gm mne'wkwenmik” E'nmen rine eigrsqee’lm. Nikitd vai Hower, Tet us go away!” The  fewup  weter shaman. lathe ight ime’ 
  e'nmen nilei’vuginet. Enne/n"-niki'ti ga’mga-notai’pi nilei'vuqinet rine’td.  Gik, 
then sheymetravelling. In one night through every land they travelled fying. Oh, 
Ke'mneku i'wkwi’, “Gik, a'men dm mewkwe'tyi'k.” 
Ke'mocka said, “Oh, but 1 will depart.” 
Puki'rgi® eigr's'q-eie’ilm.  Nini‘'uginet tu'mgit, “Eiwhue’-efie’fihn tilu”4'n,     Came (home) western shaman, Hessidtothem to the “St. Lawrence shaman, 1 saw him, , 3 on companions, oo kilew’ timete'wkwin.” — “Narigit!” — “Qai’ve.” — *Kitau’ qun, mi‘fkri 
pursue Lcoud him not” — SLyiogart thou!” — ‘lndeed” — “Well then, how 
  nitgin?® E¥nnithmn  rikalérou’nén. nmen Gm vai Enin &“nmiéhit” — wisher”  Necksce he showed it. “and Bis hs secklice”  —

----

18 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
stolen it somewhere.” — “Indeed, no!” — “Well then, what kind (of a shaman) 
was he? Then he flew up with easy motion, then fell back to the ground 
and plunged in, as though it had been water. “Oh, really, you have acquired 
new shamanistic powers.” 
His father said to him, “Well now, let us see, whether he has really 
acquired new shamanistic powers. Go on, look for Children's Death.” He flew away night after night and travelled among all kinds of beings. Nothing. 
He came back to the house. By his father he was told, “What is the matter 
with you? You cause delay. Oh, surely he lied (to the people)” He 
departed again. This time he went underground. Then he came back and 
said, “I have been unable to do it.” By his father he was told, “Oho, what 
is the matter with you? By his son, the western shaman, (the father) was 
told, “Oh, but I could not find him among any kind of beings.” 
After that he went to the Being-of-Darkness. Then at last he saw a 
man; a mere mouth. This was Children’sDeath. By the Darkness he was   
  
  
  “Na¥rigit. Tt'miaménqo’kenat tule'tinet” — Gui, ee!” — *Kita'm qun, ‘lying at thou. Wheresorver ones thowbasstalen  “lndesd, mo” — Well then, frre, miki ni'tgin® E'nmen rife’, aun-ré‘fia-tila’gh, notasq¥’ti ne'me ere’tyi’, how washe Then he flew with fying motion, tothe groumd again he fell " ; w, ty honed ne'me qinu’r mémliiikou'ts &pe’ty. “Kako, qailhma’n'gét efieAntvi-tu'ri. agin lke into the water he dived. Oho, rally © (acw) shaman you” Te power po EL'gd unin, “Kr'tam qun eple‘un Kuwi'®in qalqai'rgi'l” Byte bows Well now, whether really hehasacquived Children's thou look for!” ner ly li Cpe 
E'nmen o/mkin-mkiruk nri‘feqin, ga'mga-vageipd nilefvugin, Uraal Nr- Tan views ngs befor bye behg beach Nowa Ne 
pkirqin  ya'rak, Firgs ninfugin, “Ata, en re‘qarkin, kimeurkin. Guq, me othe nde Mews aly he whalisde' Gost. Ob use, father mcr wih the, na‘raqa’wkwa'n.” Ne'me newkwe'tqin. Enfa’q notas-qadtkou’ti nilqitqin, ne'mé belied (tothe people)” Aguin he departcd.  Tistime int the ground be went, again mye'tqin, ni'ugin, “A’men um tmetc'wkwi'k” PL’ga ninfugin, “Gogoi! 
     be came, | held, But Tepe uE wad ol Co da 1" Kata'um re'qirkin?® E'nmen ekke'ti giulin, eigrsq-eneaili, *Gug, mon tm Just now whatisthematier Then bytheson ‘he was by western shaman, “Oh, however, ih thee vy a‘men, ga‘mga-vairg’pii timete’wkwi'k.” by vey being 1 could not do Enfa’q WollqrVarrge'ti ewkwe'tyl®. E'um enmen ora‘wérathm lu¥nin. Thistime to the Darkncsseing be departed. And then man the hesswhin, Amoyiki'rgin, ¢nmen Kuwiém. Wulqi pmlonén, “Re‘qigi? — “Eurgi Ouly mow, sad (hs) Chldrwe Dy the  howssssked, “What do yon “By de Death. Darkness (want)?? — father

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 19 
questioned, “What do you want?” — “By my father I have been sent. I 
was told, ‘Go and look for Children's-Death.”” — “Oh, oh, and for what 
purpose?” — “Only to show him to the people.” — “Well, surely, he is in 
my neighbor's house.” He went there. There was an old man who dwelled 
in those regions, a mere mouth, smeared all around with dried blood. 
The shaman entered. “Oh, at last I see you.” The other one questioned him. 
(He replied) “By my father you are bidden to come” — “And for what 
purpose?” — “He said thus, ‘I want to sce the old woman! yonder.” She 
refused to go. “For what purpose?” — “They only want to see you. My 
father said, ‘Go and look for Children's-Death.’” — “Oh, but I refuse.” — 
“Please come! It seems they will not believe me.” 
Then she consented. She said to him, “Sit down on my body.” Then 
she flew up with him. A great noise spread around. It was very loud. And 
the whole world clattered and resounded. His father said, “Oh, what is the 
matter again? The world is full of noise. It appears that really he has 
  
   inehfi'unin; ini'wkwi, Kuwi'®m qalqairgil> — “Go, ‘mia riraqa’unve?” — Tusa; Lvs le, Cold ton look xl” — “0, smdapin wh fr — Deas “Atav’, le¥nve.” — “E, gu'ni, malik va'rkin.” E'nmen qi’. Lu‘ur xnqa’n ony | flonkng — “Bn deh jnlepdgh hein Ton hewn mad ht bors (homie) Inpina’éhin, yikr'rgin Enkete’gnt vam. Mud gekatoipiltn. Gug, res'qi wit. oldman, | mowi, on that limit being. Withblood he Ob, he entered. “Gik, grk efuk ckilvk’ Ne'me pile'nén, SC mikrirg yetryvut     
Oh, fortes mow stim’ Apia bewkedhim ‘By my fauher to come nentigit” — ‘lam? — “I'wkwi® enfiot, ‘En‘ke’kin mprie'w’ milu¥a'n.’” Goshen” — Wh  — Hewid thas Yonder od wom Iwstioss'™ E'nmen nrnqatqén. “Riraqaunve? — “Atav’ nereluirkinigit. Giulin Theo shercmed (og. What for" — Only they want to wee thee. He said nio’t, ‘Kuwi'®in qlqii'rgin.” — *Guq, amen tm tingae’rkmn.” — Gund to, Chir Goslukorber — Oh, bs reer | — “Indeed 
qai've; qa'ifun meti'u rine'lhiit Jes; itseems not Lshall be by belived them” E'nmen va'lomga®. I'unin, *Uwéke'tkinik qanc’lhi®” Rerifiew’nin. E'nmen Thee she abet. Sh sd On my bodys phon he 4 She made im by Ton I; obi, ani gequlilesin ya'mawan, E'nmen milo’ fa'rginén am-mkinta'wa am-orwelaa. gestnoisespresd very loud. And all the wold cteiog and resounding. F'nmen murgithi, “Go, rei lifmda fia'rginén qotétkina’tyt?. “ng ly'miia Thm Ae, fh white apn Gewald Gols Ka su he mater pen qailhma’ngét edefetvi’  E'mmen nute’s-qak puke‘rifiok riépew’nin, rpm: ly © hegre Tin oegomsd in de coming be made ded be mde 
  
+ At first Children's-Death is called a man, sow & woman. 
JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

20 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
acquired new shamanistic powers.” In coming he let her plunge underground, 
and after that appear in the outer tent. “What luck?” — “It seems that this 
time I brought Children's Death.” — “Now bring her here. I want to see 
her” She was as large as a tree. Still she decreased in size very quickly; 
and he put her on the palm of his hand before he showed her to them, so 
small had she come to be. Before she dwindled away, he spat on her, and she grew again. Then, on becoming thus, she decreased again in size. He 
made her plunge underground, then he made her appear. Then he took her 
in the other hand, and she became as large as before. 
“Oh, that is you! You are the source of sorrow among cvery kind of 
beings, to those that have children. To whomsoever a child is born, it dies 
suddenly, and you are the cause of it. You are Children's-Death. Now we 
will bind you” They tied her with thongs, but she broke them all. Then 
they tied her with a grassblade. She was struggling the whole night, but 
the grassblade proved to be tough, (it could) not be broken by her. The 
whole night through there was clamor and weeping. Then they said to her, 
  
qeu'nin Eottagn&’pi. “Amto’?” — “Etim a'men Kuwi'®m tre“tyd'n.” — “Kita” 
  i appear in the outer tent. “What — “It seems Children's 1 brought” — “Get Jo Dean along fa'nko, milu®a'n” Utte'mil nimayenqana’thm, nagam pe'Le niimqrtviqin, When, Iwmtiowe Tous Geomde | bores om dm; = ES kegritiku gaiolén, e’¢hi nénankalerow'qen, wri niiplutvi‘qin; e/chi nitalpra- nbs palm he bas patie, before be showed it to smallitis before it dwindled flogen, ninetinketuwe'qin, nimei‘fetqin, ne'me, u'rri IYakn nimqrtviqin. Ne‘me away, ho spat upon it, Weew agen, hu nbe it dimnkhed. Again coming ritipeu'nin, ne'me ripintiqeu’nin, Enfa’q qaa’kenata gei'mivin, penin nima’yen- he made it agin Be made it appesr, now with the other he has taken former big one Plunge down, hand) n qanathn. he. “Guq, e'witon Enqanai’git. Ge'mge-nikek qalbilo‘urgegrt fingastile’ks. “Ob, there now this ant how. Whinosver sures of stow Mt 10 those wilh how itdren Mi‘tikri, e'nmen ge/mge-nikin fi'nqdi néna’gtogén, un nuwiqin. E'wi-Lon How now, whoever child isbom, aad it dies There now Enqanai’git.  Kuwiéigit. Guq, amen im econ mmmwkurkmi'git!” Nilhi his art thou. Children's Desh Oh, However we will ti thee wp? With a ar thou: hong gewkutin. E'un ninenlipe’tqiet. Enfa’q tegruve”d nilge'tyan. E'nmen Boy have tied Sul Be is breakiog them. Now  wihabeachgass they ted him. Then Hom biade m-mkérét nikamagra’qén. Naqa'm limfia va¥glifin no'mriqén, inenlipe’t- whole night be wes siugelog. But opin thegmeblsds is tough, | mot to be kin. E'nmen qul‘qul nikitik, gako t¢'rgnér. E'nmen ni'ugin, Pa‘néna boken, Then cmor inthemight, obo coywg Then  theymid osu 0 him, 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 21 
“Will you do evil the same as before” — “Oh, no! not now not from now on. 1 will cease doing so.” — “Oh, but it seems to us, you will do evil 
again. You are bad, you are the source of trouble. You kill new-born 
children.” — “Oh, no! I have been made to obey by the angry ones (evil- 
minded conjurers). From now on, I shall not obey them. I repent having done so (heretofore). Oh, indeed! Sct me free.” — “But it scems you will 
do evil again. Well, we will set you free” — From now on, I will turn to the Life Giving-Being. Now the new-born child shall grow up, it shall 
die only in its old age” Then they set her free. She departed. Darkness asked her, “Well, how were you treated by 
the human beings?” — Oh, I have been cruelly treated by them. Now I 
repent. Whatsoever I may be ordered to do by the angry ones, from now 
on 1 shall not obey them.” Darkness said, “That is your way. Though 
you say now, ‘I shall not obey the angry ones,’ still you lie. It seems, when you will be hungry again, you will comply again with their requests.” 
  
releulewe’urkm?” — “Go, qar&¢m igi. Qar&m grt aflo’iét. Tipa'aa’k.” — 
Ne will hou do wioog — Ob, mot mw. Nat aowadags. Teemel?  — “Gund, qdfifun releulewe'urkm. E*tqi afatrrgégi. Oraio%mat Bi'mqaiti “Yet, | itseems thou wil do wing. Badly source of wonble Bora alien on nénanme-git” — “Guq, ere. PE'wkurga nanlmalawa’t-e-tm amarévinla. illest thou.” “0h, ol However 1am made toobey bythosesngerd. git tm qare'm mimalaffioa’k. E*tqi tmée’s’k. Ga'ko gund, qinerriThi- At proest 0 1 shall obey. Badly Ihvemedii Ob, jaded  letme uk!’ — “A'mEn Um e“tqi qd‘ifun ralaulawa’nfioa’. Kita'm qunum mrnrril- wf — ea bay seems thou will do weonly. Well sow, we ill It hit” — “Ig aflo’fiet Enagyagtathe Va'irge, eur tim i'git tur-ure’thn fi nq theegor— Nowadays we TieGiviog Being. asd mow  newlybom child a ht ar, remeifie‘erkmn, ta'lva-pa‘lko-vegtr rene’lirkm.’ E'nmen nerriThi’n. all gow up, | mere oldyig © it shall become” Then they lethimgo. E'nmen ewkwety, Wulqi pinlenén, *Amto’? ora‘wér.ra'mka, mifkri Theo he went away, by Darkness hewasasked, “Whatlock? by the human people how ne/ntrgit?” — ¢A'mén tim ELo’n ¢¥tqi nentewimin'ge’tiim. Igo’ tmée'atk. rated wast thou?" “Bat badly 1 was tortured by them. Now 1 repent. Lien “uk amirtvinla gmik rmnikelurkin, qarém i'grt milmala‘foak.” Mad even bythowsgesd tome whaoewer shll | mo atpresst I sball obey” be ordered), Wullqa ninfugin, *5io'n suhu’wallégn. Ne'wiq giv, ‘Amidvinla’ks gartm By Darkness he was tld, “Such a one art hou. Though say, | ‘To thos angered miltmala oak, Navrigit. Odin IWmta regutewio, ralmala‘wkwét” Uwillobey! | Lyioganiion, It serms agin hot wilt be bing, sgn tho wilt obey.” E'nmen amir2vinla'n ne'me wétha'wkwé', lon-wa'loma. E'nmen ye'lfi mnqa'n Thea the angered one speaks, not beeling. Then whether from that amievinla‘tilen f'nqaiti véamoa't? mgd one chili died? 
 

----

22 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
Nevertheless, when the angry ones spoke again, she paid no attention to 
them. Oh, but are the children dying only owing to the angry ones? 
Again the (shaman’s) father sent him, “Go and look for Death, by whom people are killed” Then again he sought among all kinds of beings, but 
could not find him. “What luck?” — “Oh, nothing.” — Oho, I thought you were a shaman!” He departed again, this time underground. Again he 
could not find Death, and came back. “What luck?” — “Oh, I could not find 
him.” — Oh, but what is the matter with you?” That was a wonderful father. 
Then he travelled along the crevices in the ground, and saw Iu‘metun. 
Iu'metun was black like coal, and had only three fingers on cach hand. “Oh, 
that is you. You are the source of death.” Iu'metun said, “What do you 
want? — *I have come to visit you” — “Ob, now you are meddling again 
with my affairs. No live being has ever been able to see me, and now you 
have seen me. I was not, however, to be seen by anybody.” — “My father 
— “Where to and for what purpose?” — “They only want 
to see you” They departed. “What luck? — “Yes, now I have brought 
him.” — “Well, bring him here.” 
    
Guq, ne'me Eirgithi thi‘wnin. “Vé¥rgm qilgiirgm! Reqd remkm 1 
  Oh, agin by@iberthe helssat “Deh look for! Bywhat people nvnmugin? Ne'me enmen ga‘mga-va'irge’pi nineirqin, ¢nmen nimeteugin. weld; Agi then © tmong ol beings he searched, then be could nat “Amto’? — *Gug, uid.” — *Ka'ko, mitiu’ eneflig.” Ne'me newkwe'tqin, (= On soma — oh amt demewidot Apa dev ren Enfa’q nute’sqik euta’g. Ne'me mimetewqin, niye'tqin. *Amto’? — “Go, Bim god bee Ae ecldan beame Wa — Oh 
timete’wlowiik.” — “Kokko, kata'um re‘qirkm? Tite/fiet eL'githin. 5 Told not” — “Oho, Wonder fuer the. 
  Enqa’n Enfa’q nute’s'qik pagtalkoip nilei'vugin. Tu'metun’ Iu¥nin, ¢'nmen Then this time (of the)ground by the crevices he travelled along. I'metun he saw, and nwugin, qinur qua wrlquul, Aironerlhiln.  SE'ufian, wo'tqan, ve¥irgé.git” (ews) lke jut col, with threo fogers So then, this one, deat source black ond, Te thon Iu'metund iu'nin, “Go, re'qiligit? — “Tiyopa'thit” — “Kaq! Li‘mia Fylde bows Oh widen = wigs’ = (OM Nowama dy ars? gman pegériu inelhi’. Ga'mga-vara'ta lo'k miva'w-éim. Witkum It'maa ou meddling bastforme. By ever lving being to be [was umsble, This time spain terest een gma'n inelu®i".  A'limr aloka’gtr va'ls-tim.” — “EL'gd yetryvut nentigit” — 10 ton bacnme, However of sot 0 be kind 1am? — ly he io the ode sted ar hon” — 
  
+ metus i & spit of nightmare, living in the open county sad Nding in the crevices of the ground. He 5s much dreaded by the Chukshes (ef. Vol VIL of his sesh, Pp 43 295)

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 23 
Then he showed him to them. He was no larger than a reindeer-fly. 
“Ah, here you are! You are Iu'metun. You kill everybody without illness. 
We say, ‘How wonderful, what has killed him? And it is you" — “No, I 
am not the one.” — “Indeed, you are the one. If you are not the one, 
then, indeed, I cannot become black. But if you are really Iu'metun, 1 shall 
become black from you.” — “No, truly, I am not the one. Set me free.” Indeed, he renounced his own body. “Now we will bind you.” Meanwhile 
he was induced to touch the man’s skin. All at once the place where he 
had been touched reddened, and then became black. “What now, then? 
Indeed, you are lu'metun” — “Oh, truly I am not he.’ — Yes, you are. 
You are evil, you are a source of trouble. Why do you meddle with the 
affairs of man? — “Oh, the Ground-Beings (evil spirits) tell me to do so.” 
“Also, when a man is alone in the open country, you meddle with him. 
Oh, we will tie you up” — “Oh, set me free! From now on treat the 
  
“Mi‘fiki, requ” — “Atau’ lo"nve.” Ewkwe'tyi't. “Amto’?” — “Qai'vem, 
Whew, why = Simpy focidog Thy doped. Wha — ie 
git tre'tyd®n.” — “Kita'm, fund.” 
now Tbroughthim.” — “Now, (bring hm) bere.” 
E’nmen rikalérou'nén. Rora’mél meiiie/ln. “EwiLo’n, Enganai’-git, Iu'metui- 
  Thon be thovet in. Of render be Abs, this atthon, Imes se gir. Gamgora'weian timiateérrka nénanmégi. Mui giwd, ‘Amndt Suthos | Eeeyman quite wibost las Millet Gon We uy, What 1!” — *Gu'nd, qaréménai’-gim.” — “Gund, ve bywhat she kiled? Dut itis es — ‘ley, not this one am L® — “Try, qai've. Eur qarémena'ne rityd’, qailhmamget qardm mmeetyi'k. Eur EE wo Leone tite'fier, re‘qd timrrkinén? Qui’     
  Tumetw'nu rityi® rine'newlowts — “Go, gund qarémenaigiim, qinerriluk.” to oom thon hl thos helt make me — OB fry no hone sm 1, me free” 
Ven uni thew ninelhiqin, “rion mumwkuthit’ — Efmen ginve Rally (o)body fore he tn ‘Now we wil bid te — Then  mesowbile sovasing pirinin gilhm. ¥nikim péré'irgmn gite'nin, Enga'n aimd'tirgin celhiro’e’, nefetyit. he took by the Allatonce the place of he looked his lakiog reddened, grew back. ay bi fing on i, “Amto’; Enqa'n qai've Iu‘metui-gir.” — “Go, gu'nd, qaréménai’.gim.” — *Gu'ni, “Wistoow, then indeed Ivmctnari thou” — Ob, indeed, not this ove sm 1° — “indesd, qai've. E*iqi, adatirgegi. la'm pegtifu nine'lhrgir ora’'wéran?” — *A’men yes. Badly, source of art Why meddling hast thou for mam?”  — But oats hou. erent um Lon Nota'sqa-Va'rrga infwkit.” by the Ground elogs 1 am told” “Neme nue vain sane'ntan ora'wétan pegtiu qilbrgm.  A'men om “Aguin in the beisg one meddling thou bas for Bat opes) country pros  

----

24 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
clefts of the ground with offerings. And when a shaman accuses me as the 
cause of suffering of a man, that shaman shall be able to cure him. Every 
source of illness of man shall be seen by the shamans, and even by merely 
breathing on the skin, they shall set (the sick) right. Also when a ransom 
is paid to the spirits, a single bead shall be used by the shaman as a sufficient 
payment. But when in a serious illness a reindeer is presented as ransom, 
let it be a buck, well broken, because if it struggles, it is not good for the suffering body. Also by incantations suffering shall be alleviated.” Then the 
old man said to him, *You lie” — “No, I do not. I was not a murderer 
of my own free will; the Ground-Beings told me so. Set me free. Now, even when an orphan-child wanders alone in the open country, I shall not 
meddle with him. Indeed, also an orphan-child shall be able to sleep safely 
in the open country.” — “But surely, you deceive us.” — “No, indeed! Set 
me free. Now I shall turn to the Merciful-Being, and I will help every 
orphanchild. 1 have been induced to do wrong by the Ground-Beings. 
    
mon miwkuurkindgi” — “Gog, amen ginerrilhtk. man am-taaro'fia now we will bind thee” — “Oh, © set me free. Let with offerings 
qattrgitls no'ta-mlairgitkon.  E'ur edeili qaitun telioTn  gomoka'gtr you do'trest  growndcleft places. Andif byashaman perhaps the beginning to me to sufier naranréfia’ufiofitn, efie’fild git naratanmirkoBifo’fn ora‘wérén ga‘mga-ts'Cir- shall be given the cause, by the mow shall be mended of man every sourseof shaman lls, gm, ehefld narale¥idofim; Ym1 am-viy¥irgd gilhin naranaufio’fm.  Ymi Bde bowen oon bybreding Deskin sll be pt ori. Ale 
inlet ratomiia’tifioa, kilelalhin kitka'u? efie’fild nara’lnifiofin. Ymi qora’A ransom (to shall be produced, a bead  toapaymeat byashaman shall be had. Also if a reine the spirits) deer orl naratamfio’fin, efenur vintuvrlin, emi, Enfa’q mikamagra‘en, aber llega lite awibbokm beck noeG) i eagle hoe Tanto on Enqa’m teLe'ti e¥tqi uwd’qeétt. Ym ewganva'ta te're'n ramala’ufioa’.”  En‘qa’m then to the itisbad tothebody. Also by incantations the sues shall be bettered” Then fring fo mpma’éhin nini'uqin, “N&*r1.git!” — “Gu'ns, qaiveE. E'Le am-giimna'n éna'n- the old man sid to bm, “Lyiogartihoul” — “lodesd, yes Not aly muel tothe miu {'tkili-im. E'wkurga, Nota’s'qa-Va'irga nénanwéthawa’tqén. Qinerrilhitik. mu Tio gobo Mowers, by the Grund Bing 1 am spoken Set me fee. 
Tgit Ym yei'velqai ku'liki ralai'viaiol. Qaré‘m pegtimi milhiaio’a"n. Qai've-m Now also an oghime aloo shall tnvel No with med I shall reat him, Indeed in ding mere mr yei'velgii nu'tek timé-alvalag rayrlqaifo.” — “I*tik a’men runte’erkn alo ‘sn orphn inthe open) wheresoever © shall sleep.” — “Indeed hon decevest” —    
hd country “Gu'nd, qai've. QinerriThink. I'git Yai'vad-Va'rrge tre'nelhd®. mr yei'velqai 
Clndeed, yes. Sime free Now to MeribbBeiog  Lshallbe Alo ihe orphan come. oh   
T Litraly, “hard return” (of. Val. VIL of this series, p. 669). 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 25 
From now on, let the Ground Beings be placated by offerings. Let a dog be 
killed, let it be stabbed (with an iron knife). Also let blood be sprinkled on 
the ground. Sausages let also be [stabbed] offered. The Sea-Beings also must 
be made friendly. When the people are unable to find game, something small 
may be used, a small root of Polygonum viviparum. It must be thrown into 
the sea. Then sea-game shall appear again, and all kinds of sea-game shall 
be taken. Also a man who has trouble with his young children may call as 
a shaman a little old beggar-woman.! Then the child's clothes must be pinned 
in some unusual manner. Let them be quite friendly to the conjurer. And 
when the conjurer comes, let them give her some small presents. She may 
take home some sausage. A part of it has to be thrown to the Incantation 
Beings. Then the child shall cease to suffer. Oh, set me free!” They set 
him free. Unfortunately he proved a liar. The end. 
  
tramra’ufoa'n. Nota'sqa-Varga leule'wu inelhii® Iren Fuk. Ig mi 1 I dull hep him. Ty the Ground Beings othe wrong 1 am ut ly. New alo Nota's'qa-Va'irgin narataaroAifioRin. mi a¥ttn nara’nmirkmn, naratynprrkin. the Ground-Beings shal be treated with oflerings. Alo a dog shall be killed, | shall be stabbed. Mu'tumul Ymr naranéntitkoMiofn notas'q¥t. Rorat Ymi nara‘nmirkin, 
  Bod sho shall be thrown © he ground, aussge ako shall be killed, made of Jini) naratfnpirkm. Ym1 Aqa-Va'irgin naranto’mgaunén. Ymi ginni'g-r'tug luowa’ulin hall be subbed. Alto SewBeings © shall be made feadly. Also ihe game to fd uaable ora'wer-ra’mkin Ymt nute’s'qiqin ra’nutqi ee’kelhiqai narataikifiodn anqa’gtt b man's people also of the ground sometbing small (ot) of shal be vied 10 the sea 
  Fetygonum viciparim 
naranéntitkoifionén. Naga’ limiia gmnik reurre’tyd®. Ymi timiié-mé&‘mltkén shall be throws. And again the game shall sppear. Also any kind of water   
ginni’k naraimé’trodm. Ym1 @qadingaie’tlin fata’m-yé*Ehrnpiia‘'wqai, En'qa’m game shall be taken. Also badly children baviog  moonlumioary old woman lide, then (beggar 1) 
keimi'tlu nara'lhifo. Umi finqa'yin eviTn am-alva narénatépio’rkin. Eéenur ton corer shall be saked. Abo childs clothes varomly shall bo pioned, Let i keimi'tli itl vets veime'nu nerclhiam, Ym keimitla leivuk ra*nutqai (oe) to the being tly fend  shallbetrested, also as conjrer in walking something small Conjurer gefili, mi ro'rat knqa'n ¥niki rira‘gtannén Ewga'nve-Varrgé'ti renintitkurkimin, 10 must be also supe then by him shall be taken fo the Tncantation-Beiogs shall be thrown, ven, ome Enqam dings mi ewlka ninelqin. Guq, amen qinerrilhtk’  Gug, then the chld alo mtmflrog becomes Ob, set me fee” Ob, nerrilha'n. Kita'tks ni“raqin. they set bim fee. Unfortunately the ying one. 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.   
     
    
| Among the Pacific Chukehee, ata'm-y¥chin means “beggar-womas,” though both words sigaify “moon.” Some fale must underlie this term, but 1 have been unsble to secure it.

----

26 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
2. (The Woman and the Lake-Spi 
  A girl refused to be married at the behest of her father. “To whom do 
you want to be married? You do not consent to be married to a man. 
Perhaps to a kelle you want to be married.” She paid no attention (to her 
father’s words). At the same time, every evening she would sing outside of 
the tent, “From the lake, O penis, come out!” After that she would enter 
(the house). Her father heard this, and said to his wife, “Oh, this daughter 
of ours, when we try to persuade her to marry, she quarrels with us; but to 
whom is she married? She is married to a kele of the lake.” They said 
nothing to her. 
Evening came. She went to the lake. Then she began to sing on the 
lakeshore. “From the lake, O penis, come out!” Then a [mere] penis ap- 
peared. She sat down upon it, and she herself copulated with it. At the 
dawn of the day she went home. 
  
murgh qliketik nimkiqin. “Re‘qak Om amen qaliketyl, ora‘wéretr Tote tobemamied sho rues To what However . thou wilt be to 8 man fuer ariet, 
qlike’tik aalomkElen, e'im kelek qaliketyi'? AalomkElén. E'nmen a‘mkin- bem so beso, prt (o,0 Not heeding one. Then évery ] » 
  aivé'tirok getipeifieti fia’rgm, “Guthe’p, loo, qanto’” E'nmen gere's'qiwi, evening ihe Is tnglog ouside (of “From the penis, come owl” Then she wonldente, Been, Take, qén've’r valo’mnén ELUgd, fawane'tt e'uiiot?, *Gu, fio'tr fio’on fieekik. Mu'ri 
oc ut waht yo ewe bei, Oh Ge one von Wheawe a. ineqalikeuki, vefele'ti; gik, a'men im ne'me mi‘kim qaliketyi, gr'thrkalla ce br tobe te qu on agin where sheimaried, to lakoke'ls 
qaliketyi"” Naqa'm I'ma awgé'tkinka. she is maried” But agin mot saying (snything): E'nmen wulqitvi¥, githt’n qétr. E'nmen tepaifaiiiio’® gr'thi-to’rmik, Then thecrening came, tothelke shewent. Then she begin to sing on the akesbors, “Githe'pt, lo'lo, qanto’!" Enmen l'ur lolothin prntiqityi®. E'nmen tm “Fromthelke, penis, comeow!’ Then only apes appeared. Then wa'qenén Enqa’n Ena’n &ni't wri ni'tqin, miquimugin. Ne'me mgiro‘ffiok he sat down there helf ther she ows, she copulsed. Again at the dawn of hoe ne day om nira‘gtigén. 
she came home, 
    
} This tale was left unfinished, because the next one, which was taken down earlier, and from another. person, forms its continuation. The two tales form a unit; but the second half is more populsr among the Chukehee, and has bea found ia various localities. 
 

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 27 
Then her father said to her, “Go and fetch some wood!” She obeyed. 
Meanwhile they went to the lake, he and his wife, and they deceived it (by 
this song): “From the lake, O penis, come out!” Then from the lake a penis 
was thrust out. They caught it and cut it of. Thus they killed it. The wood-carrier came home. Evening was approaching. The girl 
quickly cooked food. Evening came. Then again she went out to the lake. 
Then she was secretly watched. Again she began to sing, “From the lake, 
O penis, come out!” Nothing appeared. Another time, “From the lake, O 
penis, come out!” After that she even began, to cry. “Oh, how strange!” 
Then again, “From the lake, O penis, come out!” Nothing (appeared). 
Then she cried. She sorrowed much for the penis. Her housemates 
were secretly watching her. Oh, oh! but it was not there. She finished 
crying, and again (sang), “From the lake, O penis, come out!” She cried 
much, as if she were sorrowing for a dead (husband). At last she came home. 
She could not do anything. On the next day she went to the open country 
and found a bare skull.   
Guq, Eu'gd {unin, “Gug, a'men quielhi*!” Limala'wkwé’. E‘nmen tm On, bythe she was fOB, mow fech some Ste obeyed. Thea Taner old, wood!" gefie'wind gith¢'tr qi'tya%t. E'nmen nete’myungi'n. *Githe'ptt lolo qanto’!” With the wife tothelike they went Then they deceived it. “From thelake, penis, come ont!” 
E'nmen gith¢’pti lo'lo pmtiqaatha‘tya'n ne’'me. Gu, nepi'red'n, nedvitkui'vui'n, Then from helikea penis appewred suddenly again. Oh they took ly they cut it, 
qdnu’r iim na’nmiia®n. 
and 0 they Killed it E'nmen tm ufiele'n ye'tyl, ¢nmen nuulgitviqin a“qalp¢ nuwiqgin Thea the wood: came, then the evening wis Quick (food) conked Caner Coming. 
faus-qatéryim. Ne'me wulqitvii®. E'nmen ne'me githé'tr qityi”. E'nmen woman the big. Agun theeveniogeume. Then agin tothelske she west Thea 
nuwin-vigite'qin. E'nmen ne'me tépaifia‘aiot?, * Githe'pii lo'lo qanto’I” Ui‘. they seerllyTookedon. Then again she began to sing, “From the ake, pens, come out!” Noting. 
Neme, “Gutht’pa 10'lo qanto’ I" Gik, qinve'r térgiro’afiot. *Gik, tite’Ret-ve'rin.” Again, *From th lake, penis, come ut!” Ob, afer tht she began to cry. SOB, wonderful” 
Gik, ¢unum ne'me, “Githe’pii lo'lo qanto’!”  Ui'fia. Oh, then again, *Fomthelake, pens, comoont!® Nothing. 
Gik, térga'tyl®. Ya*ran miglo'qén lolo’gtr.  E'un nuwinvigiteqin yara'la. On died Vay sheomomsd frien Aad she ws tety by he 
Gik, neqe'm ¢un qarém en, gik. E'nmen t'rgrplrtke, nc'me, “Gith¢'pi on me soi beiog, oh Then colaghaishisg, spain, “Eromisclske, Iolo qanto’? Emnte’t um t¢'rgihn ra‘qal fan, qanu’r vel gilolén. E'nmen pois, comeoul” Even thus cing what for, lke fora dead shesorowiog. Thea 
rage’, mete'wkwi’. irga'tik nota’gti qatr, pigh-lauti'yfiin lu¥nin, etc. the came she could not Tomorrow tothe (open) she | (ound) bare herd big found, etc. Some, (ds anything). Conny went, “Told by Qo'tirgm, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village Mr's‘qan, in March, 1go1. 
4—JESUP NORTH FACIFIC EXPED., OL. Vill

----

28 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
3. (The Girl and the Skull) 
Once upon a time there was an old man and his wife. They were three in the family. Their daughter was the third. The daughter was a girl un- married, without a husband. This daughter had a separate slecping-room. They had two slecping-rooms. That of the daughter was separate. She was sleeping all by herself. The parents were sleeping together. Once upon a time the (young) woman went out and was walking about there. Then she found a bare skull lying in the wilderness. She put it into one leg of her breeches and took it home, this human skull. She carried it into her slceping-room. There she concealed it. She made a cap, puckered (along the border). With that cap she covered the skull. Then every evening, as soon as the sleeping-rooms had been put in order, the woman sets the skull near the rear wall, then she laughs at it. And that bare skull also laughs a litle, “Hm!” Her mother heard it, and said, “What may she be laughing 
  
E'nmen qol qinur mpna®hin gefie'wini airo’rgart, fe‘ckik firo’kau, 1 Once an Qetusssy) old mm with (bi) wife three they, | femalechild being the other hi, nrqa'm ya'nfadiaw Ac‘ekik, aqla'ulkilén, amata’kilén. Ere’ enqa'n 'ckk, morn epuievuman femlechd, wibout ma soi mariedbsisg, Only hat femlechld ing, ya'nta garo'kaglen, fi'riq yo'rot, enmen fe‘ekkin yanfa yoro'fs, mitkiuqin iepuaily with 8 tegping: two sleeping to femslechilds sepante sleeping. shes ping om, roam roomy the mghis ya'nfa, qutti Gm ELUgIt gere'wdnd len nitliuqinet. Lepuately, heather futher wih the wife only they are pusing (paren) eid. E'omen vai tm fe’usqit genutegliti notai'pu gelei'vi, Enqa'm enfa’q 5 Once there woman was gone to the inthewilder: © was then this time iter “ness along walking, feusqit tm pgllautryfim nu'te nlté’ra™n ganra’gtarén kona'rgiirku yo'nén woman hedge og bokhome ne bebe shoved 
piglilautrydm Enqa'n; pukiTgi® ya'rak, En-qa'm lautryhin yorottkou'ts ra'tvu- bc hed big tat (he) came home, then bead big intothesecpiog: camied    
nen, ¥'wki yorotiku gafia'ttigaen. Teqelignin tm amy, kimgmnugeliti in hes athe deping. + conceld t Made 3 cap too, with a puckered cap 
lautryim gankaléfpaitn; eamen a/mkin-aivéthen mile di'riq yofrot, — head big covered with a cap; then every  evenlog wo | seeping. rooms are . putin order), — 
fieus'qit lautr’ydin krnme gananthitva, e¢nmen Ae‘usqat tenie’wkwi’, Enfa’q 10 women head bg on te sets on, hen woman laughed, and this reaeaide ime 
Enga’n leut, pu'glrlauti’yiin gatanfiau‘fiolen, “Gm.” Era’ gaa'loma gi'wd, Gat bead, bare bead big laoghed alle, Hm Moder | hed said,

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 29 
at, this one?” — *I am laughing only at a cap, newly made and adorned.” 
Thus she deceives her mother. Then every time when she awakes in the 
morning, she puts the skull in the bottom of the bag, lest they should find it. 
Once, when the girl was again walking outside, her mother took out the 
contents of her daughter's bag-pillow.! She was looking for something, and 
therefore searched in the bag-pillow of her daughter. Suddenly she caught 
that skull by the mouth and took it out. She was startled. “Oh, oh, oh, 
horror! horror! What has become of our daughter? How very strange! 
Our |quite] unmarried daughter has become a ke'le, she has become an abomi- 
nation, an object of fear. Oh, wonder! what is she now? Not a human being. 
In truth, she is a ket.” 
The father presently said, “Oh, let us leave! No need of her. You 
speak to her to-morrow, and invite her to a walk outside with you.” 
Just as before (the mother) filled her bag-pillow and closed it in the 
  
  “Qol wo'ténrai rifnut €wiu ge'hi” — *Atiau’ gumnan tor kaletno'genat “This one what tothelugh doc” — “Vain newadorned qelit tenfu ulhrrkmet” TemywArkm ia. Evqam  ¢/mkm-kiyeu'ks ap totelaugh 1 do them” Deccives mother. Then at every waking tai'otht-poka’tkinik nénaio’qén lautryiiin, i¥nqun nere’lufin. 
  in bag-botiom shoves tin hesd big, lest they shall od Notai'pt gelei'vi fe'usqit, notagéénve’pt gelei'va, vai mia’ Ae‘ekkin tothe vider wasvalking woman, wie ylkin [ote vas walking ae moths fee rae song teres ales otto um gagtola’sén, ra¥nut ninelqari’rqin, Ae‘ckkin Eo'téot grtola’nnén. Sag pillow Tod en out someting shel seuching for, fale hls bag plow ok ut (be Cie conten, eats) of i. Lutur fan sagan lauttyim yikirge/ps gafpilén, gagto'lén, gees Lin im Allatonce head big by the mou has caught, Basiakenow, stared ann, “Uguggugu! Keke, keke, keke'!*  Neekk miakn rai nelhit? evn Chbabiael fake, hake, ek! Femechld bow Ger he 
Pis-qun-ie‘ekik &q-alvam va'lin, kele'nu geneyin, tapalo‘amoi ae‘ekik, y&'m- Qui sage femle vey singe big, othe ke as besme, sonia bas mal chil come gumgrrgm® Am, am, ttefet, mankén um! Midkri neh, gart‘men 
  object of fear. Ob, ob, wonder, dear! How she became, not being ora'wran, “tik um ke'le!” apenon, | mamcly a kell” Enqam ELThin gette'td gi'wd, “Guq, amen minpélaa'n, ra‘qalqal. rrga’tik Then faber soddeoly did said, “Ob, It us leave ber, 20 need of er, To-morrow wetha'wa qant’gm qa‘éingm nute’glits krnmal.” speaking thou do to. thon call her 10 & walk in together” her heiderness : i Tepenine’ai yo'nenat Eni'n fo'téot, yipa'nnén tepenine/da. Ye'ttim vai, Atbefore  ibesbovedin her bagpilow, shat sa belors. She came there, + The pillows of the slecping-room serve as bags. Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 171. 
2 Keke’ is an interject fear, used by womer 
+ The root of hi word sigoifies *sapentions fear” Tt is aio applied to (he peculiar sounds supposed 0 be characteristic of the voice of pits (c. Volume VII of this seis, . 437)   
        10

----

30 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
same manner. The girl came back, it grew dark, and they lay down to sleep. 
Again she set (the skull) in the evening before herself, and laughed at it, 
“Hi, hil" And the other answered, “Hm!” 
“How wonderful you are, O woman! Why are you laughing so, being 
alone, quite alone in your sleeping-room?” — *No, indeed! I am only laughing 
at a cap, newly made and adorned.” 
On the next day the mother said, “Let us go and fetch fuel” They 
gathered fuel, cut wood, and broke off (branches of) bushes. Then the mother said, “The wood-binding is too short. I will go and get some more. 
Surely, 1 shall be back soon” — “No, indeed, I will go." — “No, 1 — 
“Ah, well, go and get it.” 
So the mother went home. When she came home, her husband had 
broken camp and loaded a boat. He loaded the tent on the boat. They 
were setting off for the opposite shore. They left their daughter and cast her off. When they had almost finished, the girl could not wait any longer; 
therefore she went to look. She was moving along the steep river-bank when 
she saw that boat loaded, and (her father's) work finished. Oh, she ran on 
  
wulqatvi®® tm, rlha%t, ne'me ganattawlen aivéa'nma, ninenten‘Rewe’tqin, it grow dark, ey aga Shohussti(op) in th evn, ghetto it, 
“Gi, gi” Qanve’r limnd, “Gm!” qorai‘am. “hi, Then again, “Hm!” the other ome big. “Titefet-igtt, Acusqit-git, fam Elon tendcurkin, naam am-gma’n, “Wonderartthon,  womanarthos, | why thou laaghest, but only thou, tlvam-gma'n?® — “A’ny, atta, vai tenkaleaio’qenat qelit atta’ te'niu quite ooly thos?” — “lndesd,  vaialy, new domed “aps vainly tothe lngh ulhrrknet.” Ldo them.” irgatik tim Era’, *Krnmal mimufielmik” Vai uaelys't, guq, nuurki‘qinet, Tomorrow mother, “Together lt us go for fuel!” Ther gathesd fuck “ob, they cut wood, ttuut ne’prisn. E'nmen gia’ i'wkwi, “Enoma’t, ufitnenkiltrihm &u'migin, Dashwood they plucked. One time mother suid, “The tie, wood binding shart one, yrlhiil mrgtitn. Yiqqai® Enqam pelle trcetyd®” — “Elle a'men, gimna‘n “upplement Inilfech. Swe then quickly Ishallcome” — “No, indeed, I (will go) qai've” — “Elo, gimna'n!” — Ee’, tam, qagtigm!” pA cab, wen, tech i E'nmen-qun ra'gtie’ Tia’. Guq, enmet tm e'un piki'rgi* ya'rak, garan- Sothn  camchome moe Oh, when she cme home, has maven uwi¥qué, aVttwet getimefieLin, yarait nineifie’qin, ¢'lqui't rothe’t, bok etat haunt, ba bloc et on theft cop pote shor lefiitaq im napéla’an tim vai fie‘ekik, nantaatva’'wka'n. Guq, gaplitko’afiolé- 
aiready they left her femlechild, cast her of. Oh, They almost fished, 
nat, atau’ luwaunen, lw'ur fie'usqat, qin've’r enmen yopa'tyé, ymirtkimik wet she cou au, heros woman, to tat one time he went 0 on the scp 
    
 

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 31 
and rushed to them. Just as she came, they went aboard and her father 
pushed of. The girl held on to the steering-paddle, but her father struck 
her with a paddle on the wrist. So she let go of the steering-paddle. They 
left her, and set off far away for the other shore. The daughter was left quite alone at the camp-site. Even though a house 
had been there, there was now nothing at all, no house. Therefore she began 
to weep, and put that bare skull outside. Then she pushed it with her foot, 
and said, weeping, “This one is the cause of (it) all. What has he done, 
the bad one? They have left me, they have cast me off. Oh, dear!” 
Then the bare skull began to speak, “You make me suffer, indeed. Do 
not push me with your foot. Better let me go and procure a body for my- 
self, only do not push me so. Go and make a wood-pile, make a fire, then 
  
uleit, gite'nin tm, eur Eaqa’n %ttwet geti'nefetin, ¢'un geplrtkulect. Guq moved on, looked on iy and tht baat lode, aad bey have mihed. Oh, ‘men, kaila'wke® fan, pe‘nfinenat. E'ur puki'gi, un nelki'wka't im &'mquk, (she) ra rushed to them. Just she came, just boarded some of them, 
eur thi pukirgl, Egd a¥ttwet rwunin, 1'nvug fian ginenre'Lin feus'qit, jut before she came, by he boa he moved seeringose has canght vom,   
fuer Won, I¢etewnaiia'ta ELVgd kegrnmik ga'rkiplién. Gug, rimiletyi® fan, napelaatn, vibagesiepadle by he on he wit Fa bea sick Ob, she lt go ty ey ef br, er ga'nqan elqua't roche, bere (ar they st to the other te Gug, ralqa‘amvuk Enqa’'m fe‘ekik tilv-a‘mmnan, vele'im yara'ar ga'tvata, Oh, on the house ste then femalochild quite alone, at lt howse would have een, uid, aaraka. Qin'ver Gm tergila’tmod, Enqan piglrlautryhm kn'qa’m nothing, houseless. Therefore ihe Dogan to cry, that ba head big then etig ga'gtolen, ¢nmen Enqa’n nineqe’plugin, térga'nma nineqepliygi‘ugin, he patos, ten that she pushes it with while weeping she stikes with a foot, ide er foo, “ELo'n Gm 2’mEn, wotqanai'din ELo'n, garaqétha’én qetew’, En'ga’m napéla’-tim, “This one at onc, | What has he done evenow, then they Tet me, he bad one) nanaatwa’wkim, ELO'n im &tim® En-qa’m.” 
they cast me of, this one (is the cause)” 
Luur pifgllautr’yim wethaufod", “Inentele’urkin, gu'nd, ineqe’pluki. so birehead big begun to speak, “Thou cauest pain tly, to me, Emite’t tm muwennitaaq, ene’ ineqe'pluki. E'nmen uwilkan giteikigin, In his case shall go for (my) (do)not do mot push me This time woodplle make, body, ith your foot. 
penyolhin, Enqa'm dinttkou'ts qinenintii®.” — “Guq, amen. B'wkurga tilv- hearth, thes tothe fre throw mein’ — %Oh, all ight! However quite   
  
      
1 “Genuine paddle,” i contrast to the large and broad stcering-paddle. 2 Bion tim &tim is used as an expression of spite, as a kind of compound interjection. 10

----

32 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
throw me into the flames” — “Oh, all right! Then, however, I shall be 
quite alone. I can talk with you at least” — “Obey me, indeed. You are 
suffering, quite vainly we suffer together. I shall procure a body for myself.” 
Oh, she made a fire. It blazed up. Then the skull spoke to her again, 
and said, Well, now, throw me into the fire! Then stay with head drawn 
back into the collar of your dress, in this manner, and do not look up. 
Indeed, no matter who may look upon you, or what voices you may hear, 
do not look up!” 
She obeyed, threw (the skull) into the fire, then staid with head drawn 
back and bent down. Thus she remained. Then the fire blazed up witha 
noise for a long time. Then it went out. She remained with her head bent 
down, then she began to hear a noise, a clattering of runners; then also, 
“Oh, oh, oh; oh, oh, oh!” from a herd; loud voices, “Ah, ah, ah; ah, ah, 
ah!” and whistling. Then a caravan clattered by, still she continued to sit 
with head bent down. The clattering came nearer, and the cries, *Wago's 
  
  a'mman trenelhi; vele'rim mitwetha'urkin.” — “Quwalo’mirkin gu'ni, tegi- lone Ishallbccome; st lest we talk wih thee — “Hear me wily, thea mi'n-dirkin, attau’ len: mittegimi'n-firkm. Muwd/Bfiitaaq emitet-tm.” safes, vainly e suffer Tohll go for my) body in this case” Guq, tapenyohinge®, penyo'lhn tm nletetyi®; ruwéthawawnén 1t'mi, Ob, she made a hosith, hearth fached ups it talked to her again, unin, “Taga’m, rineninti® pényolh&ts, Enqa'm qagno’pge’ érérkou’ts wri sid toher, “Well, ow, throw me on the heath, then sit wih head into your clothes thus ‘bent down (collar) 
Evin, €un ee’pki.  Qaive, regi neregite’gt, rivnutct vai raalo’'mimat Gwe, | amd domotlook, Try, whatever mayloskos thee, whatever ther thou salt hear nes en   
quilt, ene’ eLe’pka.” givisg (aot look on.” 
Fun walo'mge, rntmin pényolht'ts, En'qa'm égno’pge’. Gu, €'nmen Aud mhebead | threcit on the beth, then  chemtwikhhead Oh, then (obeyed), bent down. 
nignopitva‘qén, a'men Gm enmen pényo'lhin nuurgirge'tqin, mnletele’iqin a'm- She at with head snd den heh made pase, | fuhed owt al bent down, kintéo, En'qa'm pi'nkui® pényoThichin, lien nuwaqetva’qén nignopitva’qén, lu‘ur the time, then westos the beamh, | oul the issitiog her hesd bent dows, only wo'tqan games wi'rgingin walomifonén, pegtu'rgrgm.  Qnver cur, ais ose’ shebegtohect, | rumersoe Then aio, “Go, go, wor g0q, goq, goq!” Nalvilithm. Qanve’r eur quli'qul, “Ga, ga, . Oh, ob, oh; oh, oh, oh" Herd the. Then also volce(s), “Ab, ab ga; gaq, gad, gaq!” Wiyopta'n. Qn've’r vai moolithin wiirgirgiiio® e/nmen Wi ah, ab, Sab Whisling. Then there the carvan mdepoise, sil rala 1gno’piln.  Wirgirgin um vai ge'pkitin, Wago', yago'!" Lu'ur vai ase wih hed bet Nowe at reached, Wego, ysl’ Oly that 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 33 
yago’!" Then a man called her from the front, “Well, there, what are you 
doing?” Oh, she looked up. A large caravan was coming. The herd was 
quite big. The man, her husband, was standing in front of her, clad in a 
shirt made of thin furs, in the best of skins. They built a camp, and put up the tent. He was quite rich in reindeer. 
Then, in truth, she began to feel quite well. 
In the beginning of the cold, early in the fall, (the parents of the woman) 
saw smoke rising. “Come, say, what settlement have we noticed just now? 
Come, let us go and visit it.” They crossed with a boat, her parents, the 
father with the mother. Oh, sit down in the outer tent. I shall cook 
some food for you” She prepared for cooking, and filled the kettle with 
meat and fat. 
While she was cooking, she broke some thigh-bones to extract the 
marrow. When the meal was finished, she gave them the marrow (with the bone splinters). “Eat this marrow!” They ate the marrow, but the thigh- 
  
qla‘ul qulile’tyi* raifauks. “A’nr vai, nre'qigit enfa’q?® Go, lilepgi®. Eun man gave voice fromthe font Well, there, whatartthon now? Oh, (she)looked And side. (doing) un 
vai nvmomighin ge'pkitin.  Qolo’, qolo’, Aalvilizhin! E'nmen tm uwa¥qué there the camp reached. Big, big, hed the! This time husband 
qla’ul a'men dm nitvétéa’qén willh-8rdqiia a’men 4m vai li‘i-tefi-evi‘ralin. 
(man) indeed is standing with a thin-fur shirt indeed there truly well clothed. small 
E'nmen tara‘aga%, yara®hn neteikid'n. Guq, c'nmen Eautuwa’thin! This me theymadethe test the they made it. Oh, then the one sich tent, (in reindeer). 
Qailhma’n'gét I'é-taniédtmot". 
Io th © truly she began to feel well, 
E'nmen um #'nkr la®la’nroma githaro’k tm len £nqa’n firlhil nilnto’ln 
Then there inthe begioning in the begin then hat smoke smoke going of the cold sing of the fal w nel¥d'n.  “Kita'm fo'on ra¥-n’mmm wi¥tku-snki mite” they saw it. Come, then, what seulement now st ft wesw i Comethen, let yopanmik” Enmen tm 'ttwd fo'mm rga%t, wk eu’git péla‘tiolit as visit (17 Thattme withthe yonder crowed, thither parents those whohid boat ei her qi'tyd', mpmathm tm Ewgin gefie'wdni, “Gi, Cotta’gnik quwa‘qetik, they went, old man fbr with the wife, On, intheoutcrient sit down, muwitik.” Uwininet, ¢nmen kokaiin yire'nnin teki‘tha, e'ée. Twillcook for Shecookedfor then the kettle dhe flled it with mest, with you." them, far. 
Guq, amen dm uwé'ma takimlagnénat gata'twalma. Qemiplrtkuk On, during the she prepared marrow with the thighebone Eating finishing cooking. for them splinters. 
kimla’t Enqaa’t yrlninet, “Wo'tqaat qanu‘utki?” Ra¥nut tim, kimlw'at, ttt Geno) vos Degen Thue pers What then, te manow; thigh py Hem, 
     
10

----

34 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
bone splinters stuck in their throats and pierced them. Thus she killed them, and they died. Finished. I have killed the wind.!   
welti pilhik ulvetys, ei'pga’t om pilgik. Ra¥nut om, twmnénat, viv't. bone in the sk, | plored Grist. What then, shekilled them, they anes bron ad Pligi’, yo'othmn trnmuga‘n. 
Finished, wind the 1 killed it. 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, in October, tgoo. 
4. (The Youth who received Supernatural Powers from the Kelet.) 
Once upon a time there was another man who lived in a single house. 
There were only three of them. The son was suffering, so the parents (even) 
could not sleep. A strong gale was blowing. Notwithstanding (the noise), 
they heard the clattering of sledge-runners, The man’s wife looked out into 
the darkness and saw the visitors. They were Re’kked. She said, “Oh, they 
are coming down upon us!” Their reindeer were breathing fire. They came 
and entered the house. The suffering one immediately even ceased to moan. “Oh, we come for provisions. Oh, dear! with what are you going to treat 
us?” — “Oh, with thong-seal meat.” -— “We are not used to it. Oh, with 
  
E'nmen qol qla’ul qon-ra’ln, ere fifro'rgart. E'kik nite'lqin, eyrlqakilinet Once an mn wihssiagle only threeof them. Son is sulriog, not sleeping other hover     
      
     mpet murgit. Nagam yoyo. Qanve'r pagtuu'rgugiéhin nanlomgatn. Ne on However, wind. Funerals the they beard i. By wins giteminet wus qtf mer, gti Reems Tk “Qinve’r tm Gewife they were inthe dak, nd the Rekkeh Shed, Sut ached 3) nayo'mtk.” Dindina nuvgéntogénat qa‘at. E'nmen yetyit, e'nmen tim we we vid Wih fre a breabiog reindeer. Thea hey came, then by them” resqi'wkwi't, ne'me githite’m tien eqadde’tki gene'tin. “Guq, takai‘pi they catered, agsin foribly the suffer without moaning fas become, SOB, for prov og one mitta’mik, goq ina‘nken im regi — “Guq, tm uneli‘tula.” — *Eiwule'tkilr we came, ob, dear! — won, thoog-seal meat." — *We do not know 
Gug, naga’'m um req?” — “Mémilr'tola.” — “Ere 
Ob, bat what? —  “Riogseal mest” — “Nou        
  
* On the shores inhabited by the Chukchee, wiad and bad weather continue for weeks, preventing all hunting and travelling. Daring those days the people stay in the inner room of the house and while away the time of unavoidable leisure by telling endless stories. The story-telling is considered a magic means of laying the wind. This idea is expressed in the last sentence. The same ides prevails among some American tribes (see, for instance, Frans Boas, Chinook Texts, p. 112). 3 Refkkeit are evil spirits (see Vol. VIL of this series, p. 295).   
o

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 35 
what are you going to treat us? — “With ring-seal meat.” — “We do not 
eat such things.” They pointed at the direction of the suffering one. “We 
want that one.” — “Indeed, there is nothing there.” 
Then one of them entered the sleeping-room, caught the suffering one by 
the ankle and carried him out. As soon as they had caught him, they only 
did thus with their mouths, whp! And only his bones were left. His little 
mother cried. Then one of the (re’kked) took off his overcoat, picked up the 
bones and put them into the overcoat. The ke’let did so with the bones of 
that man. Then they went out and said, “We are going away, watch us.” 
The old woman watched them when they were going to their sledges. They 
came to the sledges and emptied the overcoat, flinging its contents in the 
direction of the house. And there was that one just now eaten by them. 
They restored him, the suffering one, to life. He came to the house, quite 
naked, And he had acquired great shamanistic power. He entered the 
house naked. 
He seemed to be out of his wits. All at once he would strike his own 
  
inenu’kilimuri” TLe'n Enqan nendiwe'tyi'n. “Naga'm tm fio‘ongas 
  notconsumiogarewe” Thesfriog that they pointed st. “Bat hat one? — 
“Gund, uifia.” “Indeed, 50." Qinve'r eur yorottkou'ti qol resqi'wkwi’, pepdggipti Engan tere’ Thea ouedecpng ne emerd, | byewde Ga sfeiog 
nei‘mityd’n, nenne’d'n knqa’n pirine'fiu, ginu’r lien’ ne'ntri'n. “Wgp,” pee 
  hey onk him, hey cared heaton qick aly they put Wig soon him out Catching. fo. 
em-a¥tum. ELa’qai nitérga’tqen. E'nmen qol wutr@hitvue, ¢/nmen yiir'yvuninet mere bones. Mothersmall is weeping. Then one took of bis luge then he put all overcoat, a¥timit, e’nmen wutrig yo¥nénat, Enqa’n ora’wérén attic Enqa’n kele'ti. 
the bones, ie 8 feerstin man's by the kee. 
E'nmen fitout i'wkwi't, “Orghte'tu, ewkwe'til-mu’ri.”  E’'nmen tim fitolit 
Then on goiog they sid, “Look atus,  goiog away are we’ Then on those out going ou 
gite'ninet, orgt’ti qa'ult. E'nmen orguk pukirgat. Enmen nateu’laa'n Whe looked tothe thosegoing. Then tothe they came. Then they shook it pon, sledge 
wutrehin o¥rayara’gt. E'nmen Iw'ur grnmikin roo. Genei‘ulin trietn. the overcont dieely toward he Thea he ely consume. They remcited the ser use. tug one. 
E'nmen a’kérka fan rage’. EAehitv/i ya¥rat, Enqun resqiwkwit akérka, Then undressed hecamehome. Hescquirednew very. Then he catered undressed. shamasistic power 
Eun niyu’rgréetqin. nk uwi’k kipér'tkenén wu'kwa, mi‘ikri, wu’kwulhin 
And he became insane. Allatonce thebody he struck it with stone, and how, the stone 
S—IUSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXFPED, VOL. VIL.

----

36 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
body with a bowlder, and the bowlder would crumble to a mere nothing. 
From every settlement in the neighborhood there came inquisitive people. 
They wanted to kill him, and all at once they struck him with a spear. But 
his body was as hard as stone. And they could not do anything. 
After a while he married. His wife was very pretty. So the other 
people, the wrong-doers, felt a desire to have this woman. They took this 
shaman and carried him to the (open) country. There they strangled him, 
and he was killed. They took his wife and went with her to the house. 
Then they saw the one whom they had just killed sitting in the house, as 
before. “Oh, again! Oh, dear! What shall we do?” The woman was too pretty. 
So they dug a cellar, filled it with insects, [mere] hairy grubs. These 
grubs soon became quite large in size. Then they called him. (He said to the woman,) “Oh, but now I must give up the struggle. Now they will take 
you for good. But you must remember to dig the ground in the cellar.” 
They pushed him into the cellar. The grubs caught him and consumed him. 
Then (his enemies) took the woman. 
As soon as night came, she went away quietly and followed a trail 
  
uid ninellqin.  Ga‘'mga-nrmgipi peglifie’uld niyo¥qén. Nara'nmiiiqén 1 
notbeing became. Fromevery setlemeal by those curious he was visited. They wanted to kill him 
na’qam Eiki, poi'ga nurnpiqén dm, len” wukwulhin uwik, nénalwau'qen. however allatonce, with they were stabbiog. but the stone the body, they could mot. spear 
Na'wtiiigi®, fie'win nite’iqin ya®rat. Ne‘me laulau-ra'mkitha gerefieus 
Wem, oie peyons ve. Api ite pps dered 
qiv'dilin.  Guq, nota’gti ne‘nletetqin, Enqa’n ehe’film, nu'teg nmilhipe'tqin, Whehiwite Oh, tothe(open) they took him that shaman, inthe (open) they siangled oe — aes, country im, nrnmiqen. Ne'wén Gm nipe'nfitétqén, e’un nipki‘rqinet yara'gtr; i'gitkin tm 
they killeabim, _ The wie they caught, then they came tothe Rouse; the present 
myo’ mluqin enga’m yarak. “Gu, ne'me; guq, Endo’t ttefet. Mifkri Milledooe theysawhim then fathehowse. Ob, again ob, what indeed Mow 
munrntirkin?®  Midkri nite‘aqin fie‘win. hall wedotobim?” Because prety one wie. 
Qinve'r nggolgm ne'rgid'n, kimd’ néna'ttion, girgila’glaia.  Gamai‘ha- Aer that cellar they dug it, with they fled it, hairy grabs. (Those) became 
talen. Ne'me na'triiga’n, “Grk, ELon ‘git ugds'qite’urkm. Enikr't dm 
autebig. Apia  theycalledhim, OB, but mow Icemse (to come back). Allstonce 
naramata’git. Qargr'n yafiaa'n tm nute’sqan.” E'nmen nupmilid'n niggolge’ts, they will take thee. Dig thou the cellar the gronad." Then they pushed him into the cellar, 
kimd' mipi'ricité ne'tkué'n. E'nmen tm fe'wdn nip&'nfiétta, ¢'nmen nama'taa’n. byworms ken theyconsumed Then wife they casght ber, then took her. 
E'nmen niki'ruif, ga'nqan ewkwe'tyi’, Uwi¥quéin tamén‘fia‘tén tila'nvun Them the might gute far she deparied. Of husband working trl’ place Came, yom   o 
  0 
     

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 37 
This was the working-trail of her husband. She followed the trail, and found 
the duodenum of a reindeer hanging on a bush. She stopped there and made 
a fire. After that she departed again and felt thirsty. She saw a river quite 
filled with grubs, so she did not drink from that river. After a while she 
saw a lake. It was full of fish, but from this lake she could take a drink. 
At last she found her husband. He was standing outside a house, and was 
working at something. He said to her, “You have come?” 
Meanwhile he had married also among the kellet. The other wife said 
to her, “Put on my combination-suit!” But her husband said, “Do not put 
it on, you will die” His other wife said, *At least do look upon me!” Her 
husband said, “Do not look upon her. She will take your [female] soul.” 
This was a kelle-woman: therefore, if she had looked upon her, she would 
have died immediately. The other woman said again, “At least do sit on my 
pillow-bag” — “Do not sit down. She will kill your child.” 
  
Ii¥nin.  Ewqa'm dm gerkelelin fewini rét. Neme ewkwe'tyl!, cleggi sheforadi. Then as followed by woman tal. Again she departed, _ duodenum Iunin inka yimétvalin, 5 qam ki neme ulve'wkwi, kenlowa'tyt, ne'me ww oasbub hanging, ere oquin_stuidmotionley, big re made, again ewkwe'ty, geygreulin, ve'em lu¥nin, kimilhrn. Ludiwkuditi ityl'. Ne'me depated, | wanted-to drink, tver sw, | woe. Not drioking shewas Again ene? Eniw'q grthin lonin, Eni geyiresin, Biopél Ek iva Then wo, ih fh Ald, beter thee she dak ae Ne'me eww. Unique. yon, eur fa'egin nitemin'i'gin, omtlke.  Agin she departed. Husband smd Imtheouer he is working, To 
  ‘unin, “Ye'tyi®?” 
she was “You have 
  ld by bim, come E'un kelek ganawtnlén. New-tu'mgi nini‘ugin, ke'le-tu'mgd, Gumnin And among © hemamied. By wiecompamion showastold, by kelwcom. “My thee paoions Kerker qaipigun!’ Uwi'quiit Yunin, “Eni¢’ aiptka.  Revi’a'l’ New ‘combination- you put on!” By husband she was. “Not put on. “Thou wilt die!” By wife- 
it ia, tw'mgd ne'me niniuqin, *Vele'r qinegite?*" Uwi'quélt nini‘ugin, “Ene” comprion agin she vs ld “Atleast look pon mel” By bund she vas lh, Not 
inegite'ki, EL argomogit’ — “Vele'r Simte'ts qinaw’gt'?  Uwalquéita 
  look pon, but they will hee” — “At lewt close to move onl® By husband sini ugin, *Reuwi'it anef myn.” Mi'tkri znqa'm qol ke'ls fe'win a'gi”kele She was tole, “Female soul they would take” How Be kelwie  evibkeln 
   other deusqit. mgam sagen nfgitenin, mii tm emietim. Neme few. ‘wos. there shewouldlook, she would die ll at odes. Again by wie:   
  wma din, “Veldr gimu'g-tottrtkink quwa’qet!" — *Eniie’ aa‘qeka. on shewsstold, “Atleast wponmy pllow lop  aitdowal®  — ‘Doser sk down. No, nqii ra’nmugnén.” hid she wil 
 

----

38 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
The human wife went out and busied herself in the outer tent. His other 
wife had made a cellar in the outer tent. In the darkness the human wife 
fell into that cellar. At last the child began to cry quite loud. Their hus- 
band said, “Oh, where is she?” He questioned his other wife. “Don’t you 
know anything about her?” — “Oh, I do not know anything at all” Oho, 
the child was crying quite loud. 
Their husband said, “Now, then, give me the drum!” Then he looked 
for his wife among the various Beings and could not find her. Then he set 
off (to visit) other kinds of Beings, those of the Morning Dawn, and she was 
not there. Oh, oh, oh! How very extraordinary! I cannot find her.” Again 
he struck the drum. This time he went to the Mid-Day, and searched for 
her there. She was not there. 
He said to his kelle-wife, “It is you, who did (harm) to her.” The ke'le- 
wife answered him, *Why should I have done (harm) to my working-companion, 
my wife mate? — “Now then, give me the drum again!” He searched for 
  
Nito's feusqit. Cottagnétr qutr. iq dm Enqa’n, few-twmgd 1 Wentost woman. Totheowertent wen. there, by.vife compasion rggollgn teikmin; wus'qmétku priqitgin nan rggo'libke,  Qin-ve'’r Gla shemadelt; nthe dak  shewssdowsed there in the cellar. Then Angel nite’rgilatqén, qanve'r Twkwi® uwiqué, “Enfio’t tre’et, emi?” 
erie loudly, “wid bubad, “OB, dort where 
Nawa’ndifun En'qa’'m {'unin, “Va'nevan gma’n Iii qalh’gmi® — “Go, a‘men 
The wite at was told *Notatall thou knowl hast’ — OB, but 
tim gimna'n ge'mu’ Ka'ko, Angi nit¢'rgilatqén. 5 1 nocknowing? Oho, child cries much. Uwavqué i'wkwit, “Kita'm, yara'r qine/ilhi*l” E'nmen Va‘rgépi ninelqai'- Hubiad wid, “Well thn, dm give me Then among the he seeks her, Beto qin, fie'win nénalwaw'qen lk. Ne'me qoléVa'rgétr, Tha'rgéti Enfa’q the vite cannot fad. Then to the other Binge, to the Diwn this ime nrlqitqin, ‘un ui'ni. “Eyike’, yike’, yrke'. Cék-alvam-va'lin, qairik tilwa’urkin.” be depre, and sober, Ob, ab, oh Que exmortioay, wok 1mm? Ne'me nilu'tkugin. Enfa’q a'men gino’t-a’lou’ts nrlqatgin, ninelqai'rqin. Ne'me Apia depuis Th to MidDsy he departs, he secks. Again amanism, uid. 10 
not there, 
Kelle ne'win ‘unin, “Gma’n a‘men leule'wu I'ngi'n” Kelle fe'wind 
Kelwwife he ssid “Thou tothe wrong hast puther” By kelewife © tery funin, “lam leule'wn than gupilm few-tumgm?® — Kita'm lymia dead Why tote ving soitTpat Bevorkc wicompuanr — Wel gio   
ya'rar qinefilhit? enia'q Nowsqu-Vargtps qistin, gow, nin, {unin, dum giveittome mong GromadBiogs be ght oh, be fund he mid 5 her, to her,

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 39 
her among the Ground-Beings and saw her. He said to her, *Oh, what are 
you doing here” She was starving. She said, “It is your wife who made 
this cellar for me with the desire of murdering me.” 
Then her husband said, “Now let us leave her! She is bad, and so we 
shall be made childless.” — “Oh,” he said to his kele-wife, “you are an 
experienced shaman! Do practise your art a little, and let us have some recre- 
ation.” — “Aha, all right!” The woman practised her art. The shaman, 
her husband, made a man of excrement, to give her the usual answers. 
Then the woman practised her art. The man made a fire all around the 
house, and flames flashed up. Meanwhile the mannikin made of excrement 
was giving answer, “Gt, git, git” He proved to be quite lively. Then the 
kele-woman felt quite warm, because the house was ablaze, and the fire 
approached the sleeping-room. The husband and his human wife went far 
away, taking with them their obsidian scraper. 
(The following is also used as an incantation) At last the kells-woman 
  
“Gog, tuefie’t, gereqigit?’ Enmen gequpginteuin. I'wkwi', “Oh, dear! whathasheppened And she has been quite She sid, a tee py muon gu fcwand rggo'lgm getlln gumga'g telat” by thy vite for dillg® © 
Erqum wwitque Tull, Amen fm maaan, eg qiaver Then bbend said, “ut Tether be catawey, badone, because efi‘nqiiki nere'tmik.” Ne'wdn ‘unin, “Guq, a'men tim naqa’m mpilu'tkuli- childless we shall be made” Wile he told %Ob, bat aid precios er, Shean at git, a'men 4m qilu'thui®, qalarwi'wkwi'.” — “Guq, guns, tk sm.” Nawgo'hin thou, well then bedrummiog, | get some fn — OB, wel, all ight” Wome big tm gilv'tkulin. Enc/filna, uwi¥quéita tm ele’lin qla’ul geteikilm otr'tkele. began to practise By the shaman, by the husband ofexcrement a man was made to answer, 
E'nmen a’ni flaus'qa’titiin gilu'tkulin, enmen yara’in kaml¢lt guwi'ntilin 
          
Then woman the pciad da then Bowe all rowed oe was made — qla‘ula; enmen ani geywnerin. E'nmen am eflevlin qla'ulqai notrtkeqén, by theman; then bed up. Then of excrement man small is snowesingy “Git, git, git, giget” Ko'rgihn tm e'nmen a‘lqlaul. E'nmen am kele On, Wh Gh, cher Lively one en excremencmen. Then n- feusqat gomaulén ya¥rat, miki vai yaad genlc'televin, yorou' tim woman wamed up very, how there the hows has bad up,  totheslecpiog: 
ur neimewqin di'ndin. Enqa'n ganqan ewkwe'tyd't, uwa¥quiit gede'win, io approached fre. Then far yonder they departed,  usbasd with wife, auta’lhin ne’nfri’n. absitian they held it (scraper) 
(Cama knqa'n matéwga'n utvurkim) A'men @m ELOn urewkwi® (Aso tis ssiocson Iie foil) Them appesred 
 

----

40 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
appeared from the sleeping-room, because she felt too hot. And the man made of excrement, who was giving answer, was downcast, because the 
excrement was melting. He could only call out fecbly, “Git, git,” because this lively answerer was melting in the heat. 
Then the tip of the tongue of the kelle-woman jumped out and rushed in pursuit of the fugitives. It was quite swift, and soon drew near. The man 
said, “Now put down the obsidian scraper!” A big mountain originated, 
quite slippery. The tip of the tongue would climb up halfway, and then slide down again. Still, somehow it succeeded in crossing it, and continued the pursuit. 
They stuck into the ground a piece of wood, and it turned into a dense 
wood. The wood had no openings, and was quite thick and dense. When passing through that wood, the tongue came to be covered with blood. Still 
it passed through it, and continued the pursuit. Then the man said to his wife, 
“Draw a line on the ground with the little finger of your left hand" This 
time a river originated. As soon as the tongue left the bank, it was carried 
  
fiawgolhm, mi‘akei gomawlen, eur ofr'tkelm, al-gla’ul geprnneulin, miki woman big, how now ihewsmedup, slo thesnewecisg excrement. has beco cat dow, Bow sow 
nrlhigin ele], lien’, “Gat, git,” met-kiit, mi‘fikri ni'lhiqin, Enga’n ofr'tkelm 
is thawing the ex- only, “Oh, ob somehow, how now is thawing, this answering one cement, 
Vgutkin korga'&a'ut. epreent lively mas. E'nmen amr yetrtkichin kein gepi'nkulin, a‘men geele'rkilelin, ni 
      Then tongue tip of the kes bas spring out, and bas followed, swift one im naga'm, enmen reimewninet, qla‘ulqai i'wkwi® fawane’tr, “Autalhmn bat, itapprosched them, man small sid to the woman, “Obsidian seraper qirriThn I* E'nmen fags tomwa'tyé® ni'taqin; ¢‘nmen a'nt ¢/ehi am-gmo'nétt put down” Then mountain created fel slippery one; before to the middle ninellqin, nraléqén yaald'gtr; qan-ve’r met-kiit venlii tm a‘men rima’gt it becomes, it in slipping backwards; 0 that somehow  notwith tothe ober fod ae nine’lqin, ne’me velerkile'lin. 
it became, again following one. 
U'ttuut ne'npitd®n, e'un o'mkithin, Und akérkilén, wiilt-o'mkithin. 
Sick they stack i, sod a dense No without gups for quite dese wood. wedi) wood: Tighe Gik ani, yelithin witltk em-muiti genelin; ne'me qan've’r mma‘gtannén, on, tongue the inthe ease ll with blood ~ became; again so that came over Paces ne'me pukério’d, Enfa’q fe'win ne'me iunin, “Na'éhrmrnga ya‘arrlha sgn beso to rch ths time wife again be told With leh and withresnfinger (them), her, 
nute’s-qin qikeligin’  Enfa’q va'amithm tomwa'tye®, ani y&lithin geririulin the ground draw Thistime river created itself, ‘tongue the was crossing ‘upon over 
  10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 41 
down by the current, because the river was flowing in rapids. Stl it crossed 
the river. Then the man said to his wife, “Draw another line on the ground!” 
They apply all kinds of means: it crosses again and pursues them. At 
last he ordered her to draw a line with soot? of her lamp, using her right 
hand. When the tongue came to that soot river, it felt superstitious fear,’ and 
could not cross it. Then they went away and disappeared. The tongue 
probably turned back. 
The human beings ascended to the Morning Dawn. There in the upper world they died of old age. The name of the shaman is Tai‘pat. His son 
took his abode on the moon, and became a Sacrifice-Being. They throw up 
to him some thong, and in doing this they throw that thong upon every kind 
of game. They sacrifice also blood to the moon. 
The mother was immortal. And she became the Left-Side Morning Dawn? Those probably were the people from the time of first creation.   
rothé'ts, ¢'un ne’lqiqin, un nénanrmoma’tqén; miki, Enqan miprliligén totheotier and its of, amd i comied down; | hownow, thee  fows inraplds hore, valamithin. Ne‘me i'rgl®, ne'me fe‘win f‘unin, “Nute's-qin qake’ligm I" diver the, Again itcrowsed, gain the wife hetoldher, “The ground draw s ine spon!” me-ri"nut niplitaiite’nmiiqén, ne'me innin. Enfa’q ne'me velerkilef, Whatever they were applying, spin iteomedit. Then agin it followed, ne‘me reimeu'ninet. Enfaq cekin qofléqol! keliyvut ri'tfinin mrau-mrnga. sie Sapracheben Ton fomhmp wf dawaloe bemde vib righ band 
E%hi pitkerifioé® ve’emik, Enqa’n im qofle’-va‘amik yi'mgumgu® IYgnin, lua 
Before it began to to the river, then on the smuffriver to superstitious i put #, note wach for crowing ity". A‘mén tm ELo'n qamitha'wkwa't, Fn-ke-te'gnik, gepelqdnte’rin tm etr. wes, Ant hea they vanished, at that init, i returned probabl Enga’n Enqa’'m tiargetr gete'ttereet ora'werat. Pilku vi“dt Enkr Thee hen tothe down ave scended the men, Ofcldage died there ggol.  Enka’q Enqan ede’filn nr Tai'pat, ekik dm Eoin yilhretku Sore. Then there shaman ame Tapa, wn of His on the moon genetin, Taarofi-Va'irgu dm qdn've’r. Enqa’n Um vai am-taarofia nentrin became, to Sacrifice-Being & so that. That one there withall (kind) of they use. 
win sacrifices on, Va'rgu nete'n. Eogam vai ihn pineni‘nutkugin am em-fienfi, Gato, the (mre theonewha Then there thong they throw it up al thre, Se) Being became: ge'mge-gmni’k dm nineni’ntitkuqin yélh¢'tr. Cama mua eur.   
        
  
  
on every kind of game they throw it up tothomeon. Also with blood. Enfa’q im mia’ evivkilin Na'ehiTha'irgu® gene’tin. E'tim amen Enqa’at Then mother immoral fo the LefiSideDawn became, Probably those 
  tottomgrta‘gnikénat. from the ist limit of creation ones.   
  ¥ The lamp, and everything connected with it, are considered a highly efficient protection against spirits. 2 Compare p. 29, footaote 3. 3 See Vol. VII of this series, p. 303. 10

----

42 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Those that possess evil charms also dwell upon the moon in another place. Also Epilepsy was created. Of old the people were immortal. Also Coughing-of-Blood comes from there. And also a man who is visited by his enemy's anger and ceases to catch game, his misfortune is also from there. It is necessary to be on guard, else even the lucky one may feel want. 
Truly, the game is made scarce by supernatural means. Then it becomes hard to kill. The sacrificing-shamans also have been created from there, and every kind of “Beings,” at least part of them. The end. Let the wind cease! 
  
Uiwe'ze®t im elvula’k gatva'ffiolen yelhe'pii. Ne'me It’yun® ganto/m- 1 Tho i in de ave en dll on hemos, Abo Epp as been ped pee gaulen. Cit evi¥kilin re'mkin.  Ne'me mu'Liteggi enke’kin. Eur ora’wétan wcsted. | Ofold immoral the people. Ako blood coughing from thes. And the man ne'me a'niiéne Inyo, gmnni‘g-inttrk qd’lmetvin dm &a’ma i¥fiqun vai kintaya’n 
sho, to the anger st to, for game catching misortane wo le te lucky one ragno‘urkin v&'tr ginni'k tm a’'men nénankéttuwa’tqén. Ne‘me tegrik nigtigin. shai fc scr sly game ther sre by mes Alt tosh ad oe. 
Mie-cie’alin gante/'mgaulén Enio’t mere‘qin, Va'rgm em&'mquk. Gug, § Sucrifcog shaman © was creed ths of every ting, Beings? all to some pan, Ob, pligi'! Yo'yothin tm nipa‘aa’n. adit! Wind the mat cose. 
Told by Re'nto, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, in October, 1g0o. 
5. (Contest with the Ke'let) 
Free Translation. 
One time there was a man whose sons were all dying. He became old, 
and was left without sons. Then in his old age a male child was born to him. The child grew, and began to construct a boat. While the father was 
sleeping, the boy would work on the boat. Then he sct off, departed far yonder. On his journey he saw a man     
  E'nmen qol qla’ul, e’kket tim e’ur nuwi'qinet yrto'ot, ri¥nut tim gepel- Once snother man, sons were dying bor ones, what though he became 
qavin, uid generin ekkekd, pelqalqiwe'wa dingai gagtolén, gk enmen without sous, in his old being child wis bora, ob, then 
ELrgryrlqama nite”ttwungin. 
Be grew, he made s boat, infacher's sleep he was making a boat. 
E'nmen ra’nut tm Elqii’, ¢nmen Um ga'nqan® ewkwe'tyi’, lo'ur enmen 10 Thea what though hesctof, then there (very ur) he departed, snd then 
    
+ Spict of Epilepsy. See Vol. VII of this series, p. 42. 2 Benevolent 5 Compare Volume VIL of this series, p. 303. 3 Gagan refers to the motion to an indefite, very distant place. 
   

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 43 
who was on an island. “Here, come hither!” — “I will.” He came. While 
he was travelling, he had caught a small seal. 
“Oh, let us play, let us have some fun!” — “Yes!” Oh, then the little 
man hid in a boot. The other one was searching for him. He was no- 
where. Then he fell out (of the boot). “Oh, here I am! Now it is your turn.” 
The other one became a house. “Where is he, the source of trouble?” — 
“Oh, here I am!" He found him. 
“Now let us eat some liver!” — “Oh, all right! but I will go and bring 
my knife from the boat.” He brought the knife, and at the same time he 
put into his bosom the little seal lately killed by him. He put it into his 
bosom, together with some blood. “Oh, I will be first!” He pretended to 
rip open his abdomen with the knife and to eat (his own) liver. He cut the 
seal’s liver and ate it. “Now it is your turn.” All at once the other one 
ripped open his abdomen, and so died, perished, killed himself. 
The man set off, and saw another jaw-bone house. There an old kele- 
  
wla'nvuk ilitig nitva’qen, qla’ul lu¥nin. “Gog, Banko, wo'tko qata’e’l’ — 
  on bis mv onthe Bo waws, | aman heswhin Ob, be, hither move on — Gog Wand “Ege” E'nmen qatr. E'nmen tm tla'nvu gamémelelen. WI" Thea hewest. The on his he caught a seal. caveling “Guq, amen tm minuuévenmik, mmadEénmik!” — “Egei’l” Guq, “On, mow then Ie us play, leu have fant? — oY On, amen om qla’ulqai até, plekitiku atid’; enmen tm &na'rératn, mike then hemsnsmall hd, inabout he hid; then ig where 
  wii, qinve’r ¢nmen ere'tyl’. “Go, wotqanai’gim. Guq, ginfaq” Yarane a0 (thing), after that hefell(ou). Ob, ths am I. ‘Oh, thou now." Ta a house len nelyi’. “Emitonai‘am, afa’érgm? — “Go, wotqanaigtim.” Lu”nin. only bobecame. “Where ishe, suse df  — Ob, thirami® He fod ober Sim “Enfa’q minpo'ntodéta” — *Guq, a'men bm vale mrgtin a¥ttwukin.” Now ltmestsomelive” — “Ob bur akaife 1 wil eich the one from the   
    
Va'le yr'nnin; me'melqai grnmilkin Eni'n timyo’ yarro'nén, game'tima yarro'nén. The hefetched; seal small © lately his illed he patiotohis with blood to he put it into alle bosom, ether hi bosom. 
“Go, giim tm yanet” Vala'ta na'nqan rira'nnén, mipo‘ntoqén, me’mel-po’n- 
“on, 1 fmt With the the belly he ripped, be ate liver, seabiiver ite 
tagagté nine’évigin, nine'nugin. Gog, e'nmen plrtkui®. *Ginfa’q.” Cig-etuwi'k small hocw, be comumed Ob, then he folhed, “Thou now” All at once na'ngan rra’nnén.  O, vi*F, vé%tha'tyt?, uwi'k timnen. Bolly pret Ob bedi, be pene, Bf gen) be mare 
¥lqiiY, nta’q walqarai‘am unin. Ene wks Kalanptiiawr'yfmn nilautr- He set thistime jawbone howe he saw. Then there  kele old woman big was of, big cooking 
6—yasur ox CIFIC EXPED., VoL. VII,

----

44 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
woman was cooking heads. He entered. “What is the matter? Who has 
pushed his way into our house?” Then he entered, and sat down on a pillow. 
When he sat down, the kele-woman came to meet him. She carried her 
woman's knife, which was covered with coagulated blood, and began to whet 
it. All at once he rushed upon the one who was whetting the knife, snatched 
away her [woman's] knife, hit her on the head, and so she perished. He 
murdered her. 
Then he went out, set off again, and saw a house. He came to that 
house. Clothes were scattered about in it. Then suddenly a voice came from 
the hearth. “Oh, there he is! [Also] this one murders the procurers of game. 
Those whom he murdered were also procurers of our food and of game.” 
Then a head appeared. He hit the head with a harpoon. Then a 
kele-man from underground pulled it down, together with the thong, and made 
it go underground. He was moving along underground. Another small jaw-   
pa‘tqén. Resqiwkwi’. “Lima fot, ra'qatkoé® yarai, re'qi mtmla‘nnen?” heads. He entered. “Apa be, wh Ge wih Ge by what is coi” mater uses Goq, enmen Enki resqiwkwi!, &o'utkimk nuwa'qet’; wa'qet tm lien; Oh, then there be entersd, onthepilowstop sat down; sat down simply; 
yagnagt&’é® kalanpiaawr'yiim, pakolériin rme'nnin gagtime’ra-kituwe’ra'n. Gr, came to meet him <ke'le old woman big, woman's kaife the carried out with much blood hardened. Ob, ninemne’qin lien, ninemne'qin.  Cik-ctuwd’k valamna'lin  gap&'niisqiearen, he when tony, dhe whet Alstonee on de lol he rushed oz, 
pakolétim i'tkenin, lets gatha’'mnen, ve%tha'tyé®, timr’thannén. woman's knife he snatched on the Be chopped her, she perished, he murdered her. 
    on head E'nmen tm Aito’®’, ¥lqi*, ne'me yaa lu¥nin, ra’gte, mnqa'm nko Then he went set off, again house hesawit, hecameto then there 
ous, the howe, evimit nenantola’tqénat; emmen luwur vai pényolgépi mitte'tqin quliqul. dothes scattered about; Gen only here fom the heath coded a voke. “Guq, ¢udan Engan. Cama Enqanéna gnnig-gililiqigti umrrkmenat. “Ob, sothen thiseme. Abo by this one gumeprocem small we kill O, amen tim ELo’n, kinmal ne'miqii gman pibgililt, ¢'pte gini'g-gililt, Oh. now then, ogeber alo my food procure, alto game-promuers,   ne'miqii gman néna‘nme-git. thou wast killing thou. E'nmen Icut riprntigannén, ¢'nmen le'ut tnpinén, goq, ‘e”nnepita; eur Then ahead hemadetosppesrit, then the bead hesiabbed it, ob, withaharpoon; then tm qla'ul notas-qattkoi’pi ilhre’en tifunin, méipennin, notas-qadiyeu’kr aman fom wdogrend withthe fo pulled it, made it sub along the underground hong gether merge,   
  endin nile'qin. E'nmen wallqaragai qol tandamau. Enki fan rrrilnin so bewsmovisg Then jawbone house ssoiber quite diresly There he let free o small (opposite). 
kalai'in; goq, gala’®®, e'ur tim ¥'nkr walqa'rik res-qi'wkwi’. the ke'le; ob, passed, and then there into the jaw- he entered. 
bose house. 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 45 
bone house stood directly opposite. There he set the kell frec. The latter 
passed on, and he entered the jaw-bone house. Two eyeless old women were sitting there. He drew out his penis, 
directed it toward the nose of one of them, and swung it. The old woman 
said, “Hallo!” — “Ho!” — “Really, something made me think of the time 
when I had a husband!” — “Is that so?" He killed one of the old women, and flayed her, beginning at the anus. 
The body he threw on a dung-hill. The skin he put on. 
The people came, looking for a shaman. “What do you want?” — “Oh, (you have said) enough! A man's head (is aching).... By the way, why 
has your jaw become so long?” — “Oh, has it really become so long? Well, 
now, you go home. I will come quick enough.” 
Shortly afterwards he departed. “Let the one whose head aches sit up! 
Oh, this here!” And all at once he hit him on the head with a harpoon- point and killed him. So he died. He killed many more, destroyed a 
houseful. Then he came out and departed far yonder. He went home. 
  
E'un iii'riq mpriie'wqigti, elile’kiliqigti nuwagotva fqtnat. knfa’q lolo 
There two old women small, eycless small, re si Now then penis 
yito'nén qu'tina mpiae’wqayrk yaka'ggét ninenflugin, Fomen Inprie’wqai. hedrewout 10 one of fo the old women moseward he swung it. Then old woman small. them small 
“Nal” — “AP — “I'pequn, fal, uwi'quéilenk rk&tofata” — *A “Hallo!”  —  SHo¥ — “Really, of my being with 1 was made to — Is husband think of.” 
    lt‘mfa?” 
Qol mpiic'wqii umn¥n, quyaepu ruwendinin, aimak a*la-qopla‘gtt One old woman small he killd, from theanss he fayed her, | the body on so excremeat pile ri/mtinin, En'qa’m grlgiqai yimné'n. he threw it, then the skin small be putit on. 
    
  E'nmen adanalintalit ye'tyd. “Guq, re’tik — “O, rattan-fiau’iim, Then shamanfechers came, “Oh, whaido  — “Oh, caough, you went?” E'wkurga gin walqa'uifim iulule’tyl® i'm!” — “Go, eur However, thy Jw basbecome whyr — tO, [ow So lon qunum &emet Iii iululetyi® I'ma walqa'uim. Go, vien: qragtitik, man rally insuchamaomcr becomelong agin the jaw. Ob, simply go home, let me 
treletyi* med-a”qilpe.” come somewhat quik” Qiili eto'qaia’qan gewkwe'Lin. “Leutiteie™n man nanwa'qea’n! Go, Aad so a litle afierwards he departed. “Headauflerer lat them have him seated] Oh, wo'tqan dm vai” Venlfi lewti krplinén ve'meki, tmnen; vii. O, a‘men os er Msneble on th he Nt bm wibby’ Kill im bedi, but 
tim Lon, tmrtkenén, ray kunnin, fito’®’, gi'nqan ewkwe'tyi!, rage’. now he killed many, howseful destroyed, came out, there departed, went home. (very far of)

----

46 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
He reached home, and his parents rejoiced. He said, “Oh, indeed! 1 
have destroyed some of the murderers.” Ended. I have killed the wind. 
  
Ya'rau pkirgl’, a'men tm Ege gakorgau'lénat. I'wkwit Enfiot: “Gik, Tote berchid, smd them pens © reoesd He voke thw ON, jn ELo'n tefniitit tk &'mquk ttku'net” Pligi! Yo'othm tmmugi'n. ee themurderes indeed some desvoyed hom? Ended! Wind the 1 Killed 
“Told by Ruke'wgi, a Maritime Chukchée man, at Mariinsky Post, in October, 1900. 
6. (The Ai'wan and the Reindeer-Breeder.) 
In olden times there was an Ai'wan warrior who hunted whales. He had killed a whale. He had a reindeer-breeding neighbor. The son of this 
neighbor said to his old father, “Now, then, go to the whalehunter (and ask 
for some meat)” — “All right!” The Ai‘'wan said to the old man, “Oh, 
what do you want?” — My son sent me’ — “Did he?” He turned out 
the upper part of his trousers. Then he filled it full with blubber. The old 
man came home. *What result?” But he felt angry. “Why did you not 
go yourself?” 
Then the son went, in his turn. He came to the Ai'wan. The latter 
was cutting the whale (in the shallow water). One of his companions said to 
him, “The reindeer-breeder has come to you.” Then he came to the shore. 
A walrushide destined to be split, with the blubber not yet scraped away,   
Te'len-ye’p qunum e'nmen talankénqa’tkén a’rmad-ai‘'wan nire*wqin ; ne’'me Inthe olden time thea from the old time's limit warior Awan hunted whales; again gere¥wlin. Gatautuwallén. E'kketi fautuwa'ta funin murgiqai: “Kiam, 
      Re has kill Hei withthe reindeer. By the son by th reindeer. he was faker smal: “Now, then, hale," breeding (ueighbors). breeder spokento |: rule's qalgityi®.’ — “Ee tam, qailhina’nget!”  Cauduwanpma’thiqai ele om go? — cb, indeed” Reindeer breeding old man small over aiwana’ta unin: “Go, re/qiligit? — ‘Kmi'fid inenaiui'l” — “Ewe!” Grk, bythe Awan he was SOB, what dost thos — ‘By (my) lw sen” —  SWex Ob oes to: Cran?” hia on™ niquimeviri'gin.  E'nmen mrtka nénatryogén quyim konai'kén. Ra'gtiét. bebe perp Tan wih be poured 0 Gesppe oftheir, Hg ane et babber ome. “Amto’?” E'nmen gan-iénaipilén rLrgiqai. “Nalgam tm amen Einit ote What esl)?” Then agered  fubef small. “However Gout not elqata going!” 
E'nmen kik gityi®. Piki Aiwana’ehin tm miévi‘tkurkin rew; Then wom went. Came. The Atwan cots up  thewhale} tw'mgd ni‘ugin: *Grnrk &aw'éu ge'etin” Gik, enmen Ape. E, répa’lhilqal by he hows Tothes reindeer came’ Ob, then became Oh, for a dr 
  companion spoken to: breeder tothe shore. walrus hide destined one.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 47 
lay buried in the sand. He dug for it with his nails. Somehow then he 
took it by the holes in the edge with two fingers, and, ceasing to dig any 
more, shook off the sand. He pulled it out, so strong was he. He spread 
it upon the ground, the blubber upwards, to serve as a wrestling-place. 
Then they took off their clothes, the Ai‘wan and the reindeer-breeder, 
and they wrestled. It was quite slippery just to tread upon that blubber. 
The Ai‘'wan extended his hands. Then he was attacked by the reindeer- 
breeder. The latter, catching him by the head, caused it to spring off. The 
head rolled down upon the ground. He is still standing with extended hands, 
headless. Then only did the others say, “Oh, how wonderful! the head has 
sprung off” The Ai'wan fell.down and died. The reindeer-breeder took 
possession of the whale and went home. His father asked him, “Eh?” — 
“I came back.” — “What result?” — “Indeed, I took the whole whale.” — 
“Oh, you are wonderful! Still we have remained without maritime neighbors.” 
  
rrken emkivu'kelin nolootva’qen.  Cige'ik um gena’réren gululin um 1 of walrus not blubber scraped buried was. In sand covered up buried. away 
Enqa’n vegi'tkunin; ki‘tkit pottriai’pt ei'minnin Aera‘nrrlha; enmen evegr't- This he ug for wih somewhat by the holes he took it with two foges; then, sot digging 
  i nai nthe border) wut wn kukd teulanén. Yito'nén gi'nqan, emite’t tm ven miqe'tviqin. Nute'sqik the nails, he shook it He pulled there (cof), namely ite | Song wow On the grovet oe ririra’nnén, mr'tkimit girgogéa’gty, ri¥nut qunum lol e'nmen taikaus-qiolvu. he spread I, the blubber upwards, what: sow walrus then for a place to wrestle. blubber 
E'nmen  akérkitvi”at, eur ai'wan Err Cau'tu, geteikeuleet. Mifikri, 5 
Then they took offclothes, the  Afwan they the reindeer they wrestled. How,   rece ign gakr'umacén. E'nmen taufuwa'ta    mitkd'thinik inete'ntik ni'tiqin.  Aiwan: cath bberiop beading spon dippers. The Afwun bas ciudad Hs Then by he ids 
ptnfmén. E'nmen vai le'ut ganethétawlén pitik. E'nmen ami yemkr leut be was sscauied. Then the head he ba made it to incatche Then down spay head erg of ing fogle sn mirrlte’lqin.  Pa’néna nikitima’tqén, und eletki. Watks nk quitink is rolling. Sl bois cxendiog bs mo wibewhesd  Themosly (by) the Tani, her ni'wkwin, “Go, tteRet, le'ut éEhéta'tye’ Wittku wk vit, qapléta’tyé". they wid it, “Oh, wonderfsll bead sprang oft” Then only bodied, fel down. Gik, milo” re‘w i'tkenin, ra’gté®. ELgIqdid (unin: ‘E¥ — 
Oh, the whole whale he took came home. By the futher be was “ERY — 
    pe mal" spokane: “Amto’?" — *Qai've, re'w milo’ tima'taa’n.” — “Gi, ttefeti-git. E'wkurga-m- te — Sart, whe Gemcleok™ — 4On wonder ar tan, Hover 
wo’n aiwa’nka mitine’l.” 
without the we became.” Awan (acighbors)

----

48 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
They went for the whale with a train of pack-sledges. He stood on the 
seashore. That Ai'wan who was killed had sons; and while the reindeer- 
breeder, the victor of yesterday, was standing on the shore, the son of the 
Ai'wan concealed a long thong in the sand (across his path). He tugged 
at the thong, (tripped up the reindecr-breeder,) and made him fall into the 
‘water. 
So he was drowned and died. The Awan took the wife of the reindeer- 
breeder (and also his herd). Nevertheless he did not care very much about the reindeer, only slaughtered them all the time in great numbers. Still he 
ate no meat, only the tongues of the reindecr. Every morning he slaughtered 
reindeer. On waking up, he would say to, his wife, that of the reindeer- 
breeder, “Put my clothes on mel” On her refusal, he would beat her so 
hard that her head would become all swollen from the blows of his stick. “Oh, bring the herd to the house!” Then again he slaughters reindeer. The 
wife cried, sorrowing for the reindeer. “Why are you crying? — Sol’ — 
  
Guq, muti nagtaarkmn, pukirgs't, enmen afiqa-do’rmik nitve'ttaqén. Oh, wibpule bey och hey cane, hen on th sors be sod. deinen En'ga’m Enqan aiwana®hm Um vai tmyo’ gewmifllin. Enfaq, tm ai'veqen Th tat Awan he iledone with children. Now, of the ———y inenteikewd’tlin  a’rmatidavty  a'fiqa-to’rmik wéttaln, Enfa’q Um ai'wan- theinducer toweling wamior render on the semshore standing, now by Abwan's eter kata Ailhin getheiulw'ulin a‘fqa-to’rmi, Enfa’q tm AiThin getifusqitesin. won a thong in thessndconcaled othe seashore, mow hothong be gure 3 tog fo E'ur ttm neghetaw'qén memlé't. And ade him to spring to the wate. Viti, pilqd’tyl®. Enfa’q tm EauTuwén fe’'win matanén, na‘qam Gm un Hedied, wasdrowned. Now reindeevbreeder’s wife be took her, but aqora‘mnrétka ai'wan, en: relqu’érku, na’qam qora’ar nénaimitkoi'vuqén, na’qam Dot careful for the Alwan, only intheslecping- but the rein. he slaughters in great but reindeer room, deer ‘umber, 
trgir ete enukd, emyilil ninenu'qin qo'rén. A'mkimn-irganré’t .niqaa’n- Wo eat wo not citi, ouly Woogue ho ssis ofwindew.  Omevery momow beslevghtors matgén. Kiyewkr na'qam hawane'ti Zaufuwa’gti, “Qénankergipatye’!” En windeer. On the Bower to the wife to the reindeer “Dress mel” Now avakeog reser men Enga'uk tataiwéwa ripe’t lautryim ninenmnuteuqen, ofttrkipiéwa. onberrefusl by sinking even head bg he makes swollen, by stikutikog. “Gu, fellvil qanragta’thitkr” E'nmen ne'me niqaanmatila’tqén. Enfa’q im €Oh, the herd briog to the howe” Then again heslooghiersreindess mach. Now Ae'win te'rgiln, qaa’g gilolén. “lam térga‘arkin? — Ata’ — “Uwa- the wie weeping, for the tomowlol Why  weepest thou” — So’  — For reindeer 
qot&’gtt grlo’rkm?” — “E’Le.” — “E’nmen tm iam’ térga’arkm?” Te’rmetm ya®rat. 
husbesd sorowest thou?” — “No.” Then why  weepest thou?" Violence-doer very.     
  . 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 29 
“You are mourning for your husband? — “No!” — “Then why are you 
crying?” He was ready for violence. 
A small Spider-Woman visited this one who was secretly crying. She 
came down to that place. “You are married to the Ai'wan? — “Oh, yes!... And he is all the time exterminating the herd. The whole time he is slaugh- 
tering, but he eats only tongues, and consumes no meat.” — “Oh, right away 
prepare some clothes. When you are ready with them, when you have 
finished them, promise to the sea a shy rcindeerbuck. Then offer to the 
sea those clothes.” She promised. Then she threw those clothes in the 
direction of the sea. The Ai'wan was asleep. The wife remained outside, 
and continued to cry. All at once her husband appeared in the distance from 
the direction of the sea, the one who was drowned the other day. The wife 
brushed away her tears. “What is there? Methinks, my husband.” Then he 
came. “Oh, my! you have come!” — “Yes. Why arc you crying? — 
“Why, this Awan here, who stays with us, has almost exterminated our 
whole herd” Her husband questioned her, and said to her, “Oh, let us 
seize him!” 
    
Gua, Ku'rgu-Ne'utqiya £nqga’n tm vii te'rgilin fieus'qiit yo¥nén, ken- 
by Spider Worse sll hi one secredly weeping woman was visited, she 
    Kaley aqorren + Aiwanata gamatai’-gu?” — “Gik, 11... Mi‘akei, amkiniéo’ camedown fiom there, “By an Afwan marred ax hou!” — “Ob, yesl... And how, all the time qanver nelvil qo'Adontn. Ambo’ umitkoi'vuk, naqam erred yilil oven thehed bebegmto All the time slaoghiring, but ocly (asgues exterminate. 
ru'rkmnin, te’kithin va'nevan. 
  — “Gu, emite’t tm evimt qateikigmet. E'ur 
  heconsimes, the meat quite not — %Oh,  allstosce  clobes make them. When (consumed 
reteikifimet, replitkufimet, fitto¢i'mir qatvu’'un afiqa’gtr, En‘qa’m Enga‘nat you shall make you shall fish them, shy (reindeer) promise to the ses, then those hem, Back (clothes) qini'nuiiinet.”  Gik, e'nmen tw'wnén. Eniata’l afiqafiqata’gtt evimt rintminet. throw.” Oh, then sheprmised After tst to semside © clothes she threw them, 
Aiwana’thin tm geyrlqatin ¢nmen. Ne'wdn dm fa‘rgin mitva’qén ne’'me 
The Awan hasmlecpbeen thea. Wie ouside was again 
mterga‘tqen. Lu‘ur fioon uwd¥qué ininii  afiqafiqatai’pii, aivén-io’onkeén he wept. Adthen yosder husband sppeaed from seaside, of the other day in the diane npalga’wgo. Guq, mérégtuwa’® fe‘wan. *U'rifan, meluwi®qué. Na‘qam (hat drowned one. Ob, tesrsbriched away wie, Whats hers, methinks husband, There Ima” Qinve’r pukirgl. “Keke haul, yell” — “rl Iam nuérga’t-t-     Py Then hecame Oh mpl debe — Vel Why ying an 
git?” — “Miike qunum fot aiwanaigin wu'tku va'rkm, ripe’t um fellvil Boa” —  eWhy this hee Avwmbg hee hein even the herd qo'fifonén.”  Uwa¥quéiti pile'nén, i'unin, “Guq, amen tm mupi'rei'n |” he begon 19 By the husband shewasasked, shewss “Oh, well, let ustake im!" 
  exterminate.” told, 10

----

50 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
They seized him and carried him outside. Then they laid him, stretched 
out on his back, on a dunghill. They fastened his hands (to the ground) 
with spikes. And every morning all the neighbors, on awakening, would pour 
(the contents of) their chamber-vessels into his mouth. Still he lived. Thus 
they poured into his mouth urine and excrement. “Oh, let me go! I shall 
give you my wives. Have them for slaves” — “Oh, but we do not (want 
them)” — “I shall give you my riches.” — “I do not believe you!” — Indeed, 1 shall give you my wives and children. And you shall have (my) children 
for slaves” And, indeed, he was a rich Ai'wan. So they unbound him. 
The reindeer-breeder followed him. He gave his wives, and his children for 
reindeer-herdsmen. 
Then he brought to his home the small old woman, the Ai‘wan old 
woman, the mother of this one, who before that used to employ evil charms. 
He took a reindeer, a quite unbroken one; then he undressed her, and 
attached her (to it) by the ankle. Thus he tied her to the unbroken reindeer, 
The reindeer ran away. It was wintertime. Then the reindeer dragged her   
  
Nepi'rean, nennes'n. E'nmen efle-qu’plek nenwu'rrintetyii'n, e'n'ki a¥lqept They took him, they cared Then spon an cxcr- they Lad him upon bis there wi at. Tennis ac, mrngt ganomau'laat, ¥'mkm wrga’tk gamiéna‘ala kiyewki séu'ulhm nrttiqin Modi they have fmencd, each moming by every neghbor on awaken: chamberpot they pour kes 
     pe £4 yikirgrikou'tn.  Na‘qam am neyule'tqin wu'rr, c¢nmen vai yikirgitikou'tt into is month. sat Weisalve thus then here ito (his) mouth nine'ttiqin Eni Etta’, pitkd. “Guq, amen tm qinerrilhittk, man Aewanti they pourimtoit_ thus wine, excrement. Oh, now et me fre, (cxhoratve) (mp) wives miilhit.  Ra'uthu qilh'gmet” — “Guq, amen 4m qarémP — *ma’n, Iohallgve For female have them” — Ob, however sol — s(Esbot) ed Haver gaimitm mile” — Ca‘'mam’ — “Qai've nan gafiengaima Ae‘winti be Ddlgn = We —  Ched (bon) vib chine the wives hee! miiluk, man kmim purelu qilhrgitk” Guq, amen Gm na‘qam Gm Diallgive (short) (my) for slaves you shall have” Ob, however, Fy chin galmiaiwan ‘ma. Nerrfi'n. Kile'nnin fautuwa’ta. Ne'wiinti yrlninet, +d Aw nthe Tambond Hewssiloved by is aden Wives begnehin, 
eur kmi'ft qoram#é’tile. and the children for reindeer herdemen. Eaf’q Gm Inpiie'wqdi En‘qa’m aiwanmpiia‘wqdi rira’gtannén Enqa‘nen Now od omn Gea Afesnold wom mil be bright br of tis one 
La’, guiwele’sin it. Qora’ar envineukd yilhe'nnin, kettuwa'nnen, pepdggiipi moth, ne with bd bore A inde, an snbrokn be atiacedndrsed br, by aoe 
yilhe'nain.  E'nmen a’nr anve'nauka’gtr gewku'sin. Qaai‘am tm gerilemye'sin, wacked ber, Thea 0 the uabrokea one he ted ber. Reindeer big galloped away,   
      10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. st 
away, at first to the reindeer-herd, then to the open country. After that the 
“reindeer brought her back, and her backbone was all (torn off) and destroyed. 
From there the reindeer took her to the reindeer-herd again, running. After 
a while it brought her back, and her whole body was destroyed. Merely her 
legs were left unbroken. After that, before (the time when) only her legs 
were left, he unharnessed the reindeer. 
Before he freed it, it fell down and died. Then the master began to 
cough in the manner of a reindeer; and he was tearing (the ground) all the 
time, reindeer-like. After that he fell, swooning. Then he died. The end. 
  
lafleik dm vai. E'nmen vai wut enqa’n gama'tifiolén, e'nmen ya‘met 
nthe wintertime, also. Then so thatome ha dwn bem then at fn qaattkoipi, qan'ver ¥'nki nota’gti, qin've’r ¥nki ripkire'nnin qa‘ata, un © the reindeer. afer that there tothe (open) afer that there it brought her by the and 
      
  pr fii foc li Fol qe'ptiril getelpilin. Ne/me ¥'nko fian riqa‘antounén, ne'me iremyetyl®. Ne'me ber ck ws ib, Api fonts bnght br ln sgn gelope. Agi Tow = Bto-qaia’qafi ripkire'nnin, uwi'g getelpilin. Erre? tim am-gitka’t gegnulinet. afters whie it brought ber thebody was fahed. Only mere” legs were left nox 
faq im nko ¢¢hi amgitka’t nellya®t, wiya'nnénat. Now fromthere before only legs were (ef), he wnharnessed Coe render. E’¢hi wiya'nnén qora’d, qapléta’t tm qora’di, vi‘i'. Enfa’q Enga'n tm Before be unhamessed the reindeer, fll down thereindeer, died Now tat  owoer qaamél gatalha'tifolén, eur vai Foki qaamel nuw'ttatqén, ements vai. reindecrike began to cough, and also there rindecrlike be was tearing | always with (the ground) with bio head. i iets   
Qin-ver nenkefirreugin. After that he fel, swooning. 
Told by Qo'tirgin, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village Mr'sqan, in March, 1gor. 
  7. (The Visit of the Ke'let) 
Once a small house stood alone in the wilderness. The ke'let were going 
to visit it. Only a woman and her children were at home. The man, her 
  
E'nmen snne’n yara'qai gante'mfawa, kele'ti néna’yo'qén. En‘qa’n Ek Once one howesmal lot (in the wilder, by the was vied. Them there es, eter err’ fic'usqit, eur Ailnqigti Enki, qora’k tm qla‘ulqai uwi¥qué; ragrol- oly vom, | bo den es, wibbe mand buend; hous fon 
  
  1 Most of the episodes contained in this story are borrowed from well known Chukchee Stories, — “El¢/odi and bis Sons” “The Shaman with Warts," ec. These were published in my Russian edition of Chuk- rials, collected in the Kolyma country. Here the episodes in question appear in an abbreviated form. prove the usiformity of Chukehee folklore from the Kolyma River to the Pacific Ocean.    7--JKSUP NORTH EACIFIC EXPE, VOL. VIL. 10

----

52 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
husband, was with the herd. On the rear side of the house was a funeral 
place, and there lay a corpse. One time the woman showed herself to the 
middle from the sleeping-room,! and saw the dead one. In the evening the 
woman saw him. “Ah, ah! where are you from?” — “No. Iam your neigh- 
bor. I came to see you. Oh, enough! You do not know. Ke'let are going to visit you, and they are already near by.” 
A little dog was there, a tiny one, somewhere in the sleeping-room or 
in the outer tent. “Oh, there is no need of (grudging) this little dog. Now, 
then, I am going back. Come out and go with me, along my road.” 
She dressed herself, carried out the little dog and slaughtered it behind 
the house. Then she drew a line with blood all around the house. “Now, 
enter! They are coming yonder.” 
“Oh, how is it, it stays on the other shore? What, now on the island? 
From what point must I begin? Let it be from there. Oh, it seems to be   
mingal Enga’n vi*lin pala’'wkun nitva’qén, lw‘ur im ¥nqan am-gmo’n-roi’pt a thee deadone fuoemlplace? is there, and thn tat from the middle sleep . groom gewe'rwulin fe'usqat, qiLii vil. . Aiveehila fieus-qata gitenin. “Keke’, “bowed benelf woman, | md this thedead Tythocvenng woman  Bewssscen. “Ab, ah om under he skis a one. méiiko'kén” — “E'ze, maa’l-é-tim gmikei-gtim tye'tya'k. Guq, rattan-ha‘wim!   
  where fomr® — No, | neighbor am 1 © tceml Lame. Ob enough! wélvata‘arkin Enqa’n tm git, kele'ti nayo'rkin-bgit. Qin've'r pukénioa't thon dost not know there hoa, by the ket by them vislted srt thon, So that they have come Jame'k.” anos A'men tm vai a*ttigii niple¥qineqdi Enki ga'tvata, relku m eur, Andako there dog small a lie one small there © way intheckeep ory ge Zotta’gnik miki “Amen tm ra‘qalqal Enga’n a¥thiqii. Luur fot tra’gtrkin. in the ower wheres: “But not needed that dog small Bat To gE jy [ Giimrg-re'en qiré'thipgé’, qanto’é.” With me’ together thou follow the road, come on E'ur fian ké'rglpgé’, a'tuqai rme’nnin, rai'vallg tmnén, yara'ar kaml¢l Them she dresied up, dog mal caied out, onthe leeward: slanghe the Bowe al around SE ie ot thehoue teri, musa kelinin. “Tam qare’s-qiwkwi®, In'ur wo'tr pukirga'.” with she drew “Naw aie, there tow camer Pood “a’tine, “Gog, lmha eur ro'éenki mtva'qen, I'ma ilink. Mé‘ako mifino‘a’n,   
  
“Ob apn wh ondeober wah an one Fomvies sdf begin, hore hand. kita'm fio‘on, e'tim gemy's-qalin” Poigotti nénoi’ptigén, va'nivan nute’s-qan liebe) from items © deep’ Withtbespewr they thus, | motatall the grownd here, it   
T She showed herself, evidently in answer to some call or in looking for the cause of some noise. # Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 526. 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 53 
deep!” He (the ke'le) thrust down his spear-shaft,! but could not touch the 
ground. “Oh, it is deep! Let us leave it! Indeed, what shall we do?” 
They left them. The next day the husband came, and saw the slaughtered 
dog lying by the entrance. He said, “Oh, good gracious! I left all of my 
house-mates quite safe, but what may have happened to them? He gave a 
start and forced an entrance. The woman appeared (from under the cover 
of the sleeping-room). *Halloo! What is the matter with you?” — “Nothing. 
We are all right.” Only when in the sleeping-room did she tell him. Ended. 
  
nrfyo¥nen. “Guq, gemrsqilin tm, an Mmpelaa'n dm, qailokm mi‘akri EE Let us leave it, indeed Bow 
minynti.” Should we set?" Napélaa'n. 1rga’tik uwi¥qué geetin, trLingat a‘ttiqa‘anmio lunin, {unin They left it. Tomomow husband came, by the ene dog slaughtered he saw it, he sid   
     Ganceside aon 
Eniio’t, ¥wkwi, *Guq, ma'nkén im. Emite’t-im tpélanat nime’lqinet, na’qam he spoke, “Oh, my! Tdeed, Ile them good ones, but 
im won reVi't?  Getefifiite’Lin. Trtul nénarkiplewqén, Enki fe‘win 
what is the Hegwvesswt.  Tothe  hegueapuh thn wile matter with them” entrance 
ure'wkwi’. “Mei, ra%turi?” — “Elo’, nmelmuri” Witku relku tu'wnén. 
appewed. “Hallo! whats with — No, good is with ws’ Oslystfint in the shetold him. Yourt deep: 
Plagi’.    The ead. 
‘Told by Agata, a Maritime Chukchee woman, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
8. (The Child-Monster.) 
One time some people lived in an underground house. It had three 
sleeping-rooms. That of the son was on the eastern side; that of the father 
was on the western side; the third one was in the middle, on the rear side 
of the house. This last was another man's. They lived in group-marriage, and their habitations stood quite close to one another. 
    
E'omen qu'tti walqara'lit; firo’q yo'rot, gol ekkin yoro’at aiva’ongar, Once some (living in) the three ilespiog one sows sleeping. (io) the windward Jaw-boae Bouse; pig oom sae; mpina’chéén ELYgmén yoroiit aigis'qo’onqar; qol qoi‘maron wit'thiér, tw'mgin od man's fabers  slecpiog (0) thelesward side; the rearside (in) the middle, strangers’ oom other sleeping: oom Enqa’n, qo'niim gefiewtw'mgeLeet Enqa‘nat gatiméd'éra. at, because do the groupmamisge those with the near house “were they, (to the house).   
+ He thooght the blood of the dog was a deep river. 10

----

54 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
The woman of the sleeping-room to the east was with child. Her hus- 
band, however, had gone far away for a visit to the people, and remained 
with the people quite a long time. In his absence the woman bore a child. 
They awoke the next morning, after they had slept one night. They awoke 
at dawn, and the young mother had to go out and walk around the house 
(as is required by the ceremonial). Still, after they awoke, the woman did 
not go out, and did not carry the infant out of the sleeping-room. 
“Oh, come out! Bring out the infant!” Still the woman does not go 
out, (acting) as if she had not heard, 
The next day it grew dark again, but the woman did not go out. “Oh, 
oh! you with the child! why do you not come out nor bring out the infant? 
Notwithstanding everything, you do not listen, nor do you want to obey.” 
Once more it grew dark. They went to sleep again. All the people 
of that place, the whole house, went to sleep. Two men from the neigh- 
  
enqa'm  aivaLolen fe'wdn topiln.  Enqam uwi'qué  gere/mkiilin, And there of the wind woman  progmnt. And there buband west for a vist ani de othe people, ganqan tm. Enfa’q amen re'mkik oratva’s. Gik, a'mifa kmife'tyi® fie'win. fra with the enghes. Oh, Nim bring bore a child wie. £5 een E'nmen wrga'uk kiye'wka®t, — yilq#'ty®t im ya'net Enqana’t um, — irga'tik Once tomorrow they awoke, — they sept What toe, omar kaye'wkwi't 1rgiro’k, kin @m vai igitkin — rrga'tk 4m vai nrntogen, they awoke on che dawn, that one with Whe — tomorow (6) is going hia present day, ony yaar ninekemlilqin, — enqa'm kiye'wkwi't, na‘qam anto’kelén Aeus'qit, house (she)isgoingaround, — and then they awoke, will not going out woman, 
nene’neqai anintona’tkilen. nfunt lie she is not making to go out. 
“Gik, qanto’®, qanintofia’tye® nencme’ Enfa’q enmen aallomkslen, «b, gow,  mekewgoow ist’  Thistme too shoisnothemsing, va'névan anto’kilen ne'usqit. alogether not going out woman. Qinve'r ¢nmen rrga’tk pa‘néna wulgitvi®, Le anto’kilén. “Kako, So, 0, tomorow once more it grew dark, bot mot ging owt. “Oh, ka'ko, kmifie'teli-git, ne'us'qti-git, anto'kEl-é-git, nenc'neqdi ia’'m anmtona'tka oh, with the cha vomamaridbos, aot goog owat: infant ile why not making to thon hon, i out rftrkin?  Ka'ko, vi'en aallomkil-t-grt, alima'lkel-e-git.” dost (ho)! Oh meren not ewingartihon, not obeyingareihon.” 
Ne'me wulqatvi, ne'me yilga'ty:     
    E/nmen tim gellqainet zn‘qe’kinet 
  Again it grew dark, again (they) slept. Then they have slept Sy oF ar 
pee) milo’, walqa'erriir geillqain. NiTiq ora'wérat re‘mkinet mieundu’kinet, — al, jawbone hove has slegt. Two | men those of (the those for wife serving, — fall \4 neighboring) 
People. 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. ss 
boring camps, who were serving there as suitors, — they also went to sleep. 
The old man had a single unmarried daughter. Both of (the suitors) were 
serving there with the desire of having her for a wife. 
The little infant awoke and began to cry, “Af, ana’, aia’ The 
mother and her female companions were sleeping quite soundly. So from 
the outside, from the side of the outer tent,’ the kell answered, *Afa’, aia’, 
afa’l" Once more the infant cried, “Afia’, afa’, aia’ I” and from the entranc 
room was answered, “Afa’, aia’, aia’! And still before the ke'le reached 
the entrance-room, the infant crept out from under the pillow, then rose and 
strode over to the sleeping-room on the rear side. 
Before he could reach the rear-side sleeping-room, a boy who was there 
awoke, and uttered a cry. Then the infant dropped down. All the people 
awoke. *See there! the little infant has appeared (out of the sleeping-room)!” 
and from under the pillow it still continued, “Afa’, aia’, afia’!l” 
The people awoke. “How strange it is! Think of them! The mother 
and her female companions are still sleeping.” The old man, cven, began to 
    
mpmna'théén énqa'n qun-iieekik, ya'nfa-fiaw, Enqa’n tm Enqa’n fathiiaunde’ 1 old man's that single womanchild, separstc-womag, that one that from both sides for 
kenat, — firenle’fiu, Enqa‘at geilqireet Ym. 
wie serving, — two of them, those have slept alo. 
Nananaga'geifin tm ami geggeu'lm, nitérgire’qén, ‘Ada’, afia’, "afia’ I" 
Infant lide the awoke, he begun to cry, CAR, ai, aml” 
ELa’t qo'n'pii geillqiLeet. Qin've’r e’ur fargmoi’pu Zotta’gnépt, “Af, afia’, 
The atogetier dave sept. So from fh ude from th pllow's “A, ai’, mothers a 
aia’ I” Kalaifia. E'nmen nananagaghiiin, ‘Af’, aia, afia’l” Qin'ver 5 ai" bythekelbig. Oncemors infant litle the, | Am, sw, awl’ So 
tiwrai’pi, ‘Afi’, afia’, aia’!” E‘¢hi trian taagnén, Sot-ydfiét prntiqityi® from the | SAW, si, aw" Before door house he touched, pillow to the appeared 
  door owe, der ids hvongh nene’neqii, qutyl® im a‘mén, qoi‘ma-rou’tn we'qityi’. infant tice, he arose, to the resvside he strode ecping room chi qo‘ ma-ron we'qannin, qla‘ulqai qoi'ma-ro’kén kiye'wkwi®, quliletyi’. Before seaaide sleep hestodeover, man like of the reavside he awoke, gave voce. nro espingroon Enqa’m pikagta'tyt® térga’nlm. Enqa'm rggeuninet milo’. “Vai, vai, Then fldown  thocyingons. Thea they awoke all | “There ther, nene’neqdi prtiqityé®” Lien: fot-y¢nki, ‘Ana’, ada’, ada” 10 infant lide appeared through.” And sill pillow on the SAR, © aie, aa enter onte, Kiyauta® om re'mkm, “Treen fian, ma'mken! Venom Ergma'n! A awoke people, “Wonderul! wodgnciows! Let them (0)!   
+ Cota (literally, “pillows edge") is used to designate the outer tent. The pillows of the slecping- room form its outer border. Beyond that border the outer tent begins (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 171).

----

56 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
mutter, “Only think of it! The infant has appeared from under the pillow. 
Let them carry it back.” No answer. They do not hear. 
“Oh, oh! There, now, rouse them!” One woman went out and walked 
over to that sleeping-room. She lifted the cover of the sleeping-room; but 
there was nothing at all there, only plenty of blood on the bed-skins. Indeed, the infant has eaten up the mother and her companions! “Oh, there is 
nothing here, only the bed-skins full of blood!” The women did not take 
care of the child when it cried. So the kellz did so (in their place). 
“Oh, oh! Let us go away quickly! No need of this child” That very 
night they lef the house before dawn. They pitched their tent some ways 
up the hill near by. They left the little one in the old house, quite alive. 
All of a sudden the old man said, “Oh, we have left a knife, a big 
knife, carried on a shoulderstrap! It is hanging down (in the sleeping-room) 
on the western side in the corner. Alas!” One of the suitors heard this, and 
  
gellgilnet E1a’t’  Qan've’r Inpma‘chin marautétmo’®’: “Venom gina'n. have slept mothers” So Gd man began to chides et deeb! Cotta’gnétr nene'neqdi pratiqitye’. Nenwui'n!” Ui‘a, aalomkelén. Pillow to the iofent litle  appesced trough. Let them carry No thing), not listening. in W “Am, am, kako! Taga'm, ginggeusqiwkutki” Ne'usqat arto’. Gi, Ea There, now, mks them wake up all stance’ Woman went out. Ob, €/nmeft im nito’é, yorou'tr qatr, tro’mnén yorofi, e’un ui'fd, tilv-ui'fd, erre’d 
oncomore went out tothe sleep she door opened thesleep sod mo mothingatall only groom went, groom, © (hing), ai’kolak moLrydm tm. Mike, genu'linet En‘qa'm ELa’t milo’. “Vai, vail onthe bet the bd bi Indeed, be has eaten there mothers all. “Ther, there! 
vai tm vif Ere tm vai mui vai ai’kolat” Emie'tim ataa‘nkilen there nothing. Oaly there in the there bedskine” Atleast not touching. blood 
t@rgilin, Enqa’m kele'ti gata‘anen. Being hen by the hows touched. ane, in “Am, amen, mmranto'mik! Ra‘qalqal” Nikéma’dt fan ranto’at, yep “Oh, oh, let us go from the No need of it.” In the night- from the house still house! time they went out “quickly, 
  wrgiro'ka, énno'tkinik tara’nga®t, a’un-aiou’ti napé’laa’n Enqana’qai 
  not dawning, oo the slope of they piiched alo- alive they ef that lle ome. Fo Ai A rary E'nmen mpmathryfm, “Guq, vale mitpeTaa’n, émte'-valaifim mutptTan Oncemore od mun big, Ugh kif weleh, | forcamyioghaifebiy we let wnmu fan Gm. Aigisqo'ok kérvatagnik metvalin valaifm, guq! Unmu saat On he leeward at the side of the Buogingdown kaif big, oh! Als!" Sad how flan um eon” Qol tim fieundulin gaa’lomlétn, ¥wkwi® ¥'nflot, unin, *Gug, One forthewie © bedi, | hesid tu, Besid 40h, serving to him, 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 57 
spoke thus: “Oh, truly, I want to show myself a true suitor! I will fetch the knife. Iam able to do it. [The other one did not utter a sound] I say to you quite openly, I came for a wife. I want to marry her straightway.” He took off his outer clothes, then tied his trousers tightly above the ankles. The old man said, *No, indeed! Be quiet! No need of this! Even of the knife there is no need at all” — “Nay, certainly I shall fetch it.” He ran to the jaw-bone house, heeding not the night-time or the darkness. When he approached it, the same ominous crying was heard from it uninterruptedly : “ARa’, ana’, ana’l’ He walked around the jaw-bone house 
and entered it. Then he walked around the crying one close to the sleeping-room. As soon as the man entered, the infant gave pursuit. In the outer tent, through the darkness, from that corner the infant pursued him, crying all the time. As soon as it scented him, it gave pursuit. The man stretched out his hand and found the big knife. He caught it and rushed out. The   
Ité-harau'tle mminmik. Mmrgtiga'n, gaimadé [qol tim aqoléalomkelen]. truly wife seeking let us be. We will bring it, able (todoit) [the other voice not making a sound]. 
Giim, guni lidppe tiurkin, gim fuk tle'rkin, trafautrirkin vets qun!” I, however quietly: Tssy, 1 fora am going 1 want tommy straight way!” wife about, 
Nitviture'qin mpaaqada’wguqén. Inpinai'yha, “Guq, gud, ilwki qat- He took of bis ho tied (bs tower) Bytheoldmanbig, “Ob, indeed, motion: cntr clothes” ound hi sx [4 va'rkm, ra‘qalqal, amr valle ra‘qalqal” — “Gund, qai've tgtrkm.” Luur wide, | not needed, even Jaife mot needed” — “Indeed, corwioly 1 bring it? And then walqarai‘iet kiauta'tyé®, na’qam wus'qmérku na'qam nikita. © the jowbone he glloped of, but inthe dark bu in the Howse big + nighttime. Nineimew'qin  wa'lqar. Lien: aqeife’wa quli'ti, “Afa’, ada’, ada’l’ He approached jawbone Only bad crying vos AG, aa, am?” ry ving, Nineke/mlilgin walqar, nres'qiugin, ralkoi’pii nincke/mlilgin térga’tiln. He willed arowd jawbone emtmed, from the he went stoumd the ciyingone, omer seeping room 
Gi, piki'rgi® resqi’wkwi® qla’ul, nenene’qid kile'nin. Cotta’gnik wus'q'm- Ob heriies eed mn, byGelmntile hepumed Ontbpliovs in te 
&ku, rit¢'n'ma kirvete’gnik kile'nin ‘ur vai térgaté’ti; nénatkei‘fiugén, niner- Gk by gue fn the od Ge bepumed sad Gore cong; be came 0 he smell, Be     
   
      kilegin. U'rri mmngr'uinm rnin, cur émt¢’valaifn nipitkeu'nin, pi'rinin, pumsedbim. Thu hod he didi, sd forcumyinglaiebi he hitit, he tok it un ganto’s-qeulén cur Enga’n térgaté’ti ninerkile’qin, ¢'nmen Um ganto’s- mi © rwhed ot ad tat cyiog he pursed him, then Te rushed qataten gakithinta’tén yarai'py, erre’é wa'lqar nineke/mlilqin ragrolmik-kamle’l, ow may fume oy jerome be walked srund sound te bore in 
Enrqa’m nres'qiugin térga’til. ten eatesd  thecipingone. 10

----

58 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
infant followed, still crying. He rushed out and ran away, but before that 
he made a tour around the house. Then the crying one entered again. 
He came to the tent and rested for some time. The old man was 
muttering still, “What noise is there? Then he would stop [his voice] and 
listen for a while. Oh, I wish we had not sent him! We have brought a stranger to peril.” 
He rested awhile and entered the tent. “There, there, take your knife!” — “Oh, oh! this is the knife I was so sorry about” And presently he cried 
to the girl, “There, you woman! Hurry up and arrange the sleeping-room 
He will get a chill in his back. Bring him in. Let him warm himself. His 
back will be cold” — “Now, then, come in!” So the man married and took 
the girl. At that time he married. The end.   
Guq, yarau’ puki'rgi®, gil Paiewfutot’. Lu‘ur mpma'¢hin nidmvadéqén, 1 Oh, tothe he reched, sh! His fugue went Andstll old man is moering, house out, “0, ri‘nutet fio‘onqanat?” A’thiqolé/ntok. Lien gapalomté'la, “Guq, endi'uki “Oh, what are there? Almost the voice not Oaly he i listening, “Oh, mot seat (sounds) Teutiog out. (ween) mmtntinet.  E, tu'n-nikek, tw'mgin gla’ul mitmeretyd’n, un’'mu fian im e’un.” 
we would sot Eb, bow sddealy,  snger man we have lo, utr ave them, Lien pafieu’futo”plrtke, res:giwkwi’. “Vai, vai, vale!” — *Ka'ko, Only fatigueletiog out finishing, he catered. There, there, knife!” — Oh, 
ka'ko, amen tim wo'tqan vale qililw'u ninelhi-im.” Enqa'm Rausqatttn 5 EN this Joife tobesoryfor 1 did it” Then to the woman 
    que), “Rai, rai, Acusqitigit rail qatanyorotukwa'tys, reriliqqitit Ge! presenly, “There, there, womanatdhow there! well he sleepingoroom he will have cold Eh! phony in the back. qana’tvun, noma’wkwa'n, reriliqqi'tia, a'men?” — *Taga'm, qaure’ Na'qam brog bim in, let im war himself, he will have cold yes” — Now, then, eater the __ Moreover the backs Usopegroon” Imi fa'wungé, ne‘us'qit pirinin. Enqa’m Um Ion Rawtnge’. Err. he muizé, woman betookher. Thea he mamicd. Only this, 
“Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
9. (The Orphan.) 
Once (there was) an orphan child who lived quite by himself [quite alone]. 
In that place there lived numerous people. The people beat him all the time,   
E'nmen qol yei'velqai, tlv-a‘mman va'lqai, tilv-a‘mman vam. Crmquq Once some orphan small, quite alone being quite alone being. Partly (diminue), ni‘mkigin re’'mkin nimitvalm. Am talai'va ni'ntaqén re’mki, termetriu 10 
bumerous people there abiding, Only withstriking he was done by the with violent people, doing nr'lhigen ma’‘ala am talai'va. 
he was treated by the oaly with striking. neighbors

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 59 
and they always treated him violently. The neighbors were all the time 
striking him. 
Some of the people arranged a thanksgiving ceremonial. He came to 
that house, together with the other guests. Then they said, “Oh, you take 
part in the ceremonial!” — “Oh, how can I take part in the ceremonial? 
I have no (shamanistic knowledge). 1 am wholly ignorant.” — “Oh, then 
just sing a little.” Then he began to take part in the ceremonial, and simply 
sang a song: “Ototototototol, otatatatatatai’ I” 
“Oh, what is it? Why does he use this bad little song?” They gave 
him a sound thrashing. He was defenceless. Then they ordered him again: 
“Well, then, take part in the ceremonial.” — “Ototototototoi’, otatatatatatai’ |” 
They gave him another thrashing. 
There was an old jaw-bone house, quite ancient and empty [the jaw-bone 
house). He went there in the dark, and there he sang into this house, 
“Ototototototoi’, otatatatatatai’!” Then from the dark, from within, the ke'le 
answered, “Ototototototoi’, otatatatatatai’!” He sang again, “Ototototototoi’ |" 
and it answered, “Ototototototoi’!” from within.   
Gemdi'ti &'mqiq re'mkmn, tWmugreen mneletr gelqatin. Naqam 
       puny people, withthestrngen to those per- he went. However, thanksgiving gether Ceremonial 
ni‘uginet qu'tt, “Ge, am, qamAii‘"" — “Go! mifkri mimiian? Ufl-im, wid some, SER, well tkepatinthe — Oh! how shall lakepan Nothing Iam, hankgivi h inthe thnkagiving | Baviog Ceremonial” ceremonial? eiwule’tkil-i-dm I” — “Go, emite’t im qitipei’fiei’!” Qan've’r eur mmie'Afiot. 
sot knowiog Taml® — 60K, atleast sing!” Therefore he began to take pactin the thanks. Fiviog ceremonial. Lien e’un e’nmen gegre'plin: “Ototototototoi’, Otatatatatatai’1” 
      Only then hesingasong:  *Ototototototf’, Otatatatatatait” 
“Guq, mimkri fan? lam Aqi-grepqii yaarknén? Natatai'wuan. “bn how Why bad litle song he is using” They strack him hard. 
Niyrrkagin. Naga'm nmnfifuqin ne'me, “Gund, gamiii®!” — “Ototototototof’, Asoft one However, they sent him again, *Now,then, be thanks —  “Otototolottols (a » seule) giving” otatatatatatai’!” Ne’me nitalai'wuqén. 
rns Agiin they strike him. 
Qanve'r pé'ttiwalkatolhé't, amran gapéttaién walka'ttinm. Ne'nfi Then totheold jawbone house, slonehouse has grown old _thejawbonchouse. There 
gellqitin wus'qi'métku, fAe'nfi onmittkoutr tipaifia‘fifioe®, *Ototototototoi’, 
Be has gone in the dark, there inward he sang, “Outatottotor’, 
otatatatatatai’ I” Qin‘ve’r wiis'qi€n’gipii onmitrkoi’pii, “Ototototototoi’, ota- 
prs— The from the dark from within, “Otutatototol, ota 
tatatatatai’ I" Kalai‘fin. nfa’q li‘miid, *Ototototototoi’ I" Qin-ver, “Ototo- tanta” Kelle. Now agin, “Ootototolotolt" Then, “Otter 
totototoi’ I” onmitkoi pi. totototal'” from within. 
SJESUP NORTH PACIFIC RXFED., VOL VIL 10

----

60 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Then the kele called him: “O child!” Till then he had no assistant 
spirits, not a single one. “O child!” — “Ho!” — “What do you want?” — 
“Oh, enough of this! The people treat me very badly and with violence, all 
the people.” — “Oh, well, go out!” The ke'le made him go out. He went 
out, and went again to those who were performing the thanksgiving ceremonial. 
“Oh, indeed, take part in the ceremonial! Oh, where have you come from? 
Take part in the ceremonial, will you? 
He again began to take part in the ceremonial, and sang as before, 
“Ototototototoi’ I" — “Ah, ah, what a song he is using again!" He continued, 
notwithstanding, “Ototototototoi’, otatatatatatai’!” Then from within, from under- 
ground, came the answer, *Ototototototoi’ I” 
One old man from a neighboring house heard this. The others were 
noisy, and heard nothing. “Well, now, stop your noise! 1 heard something. 
A voice came to me.” — “Where should he find such a voice, this scamp?” 
Then again it came from within. 
“Oh, my! What is it?” The voice gradually approached. They heard   
  
Qin'ver eifieunin: “Nene!” kele'ti. Enqan uiia Gt eiieikalin, tlv- Then  hecalledhim:  SCHAY  bythekels. That one noting be- mo spin quite foe haviog, 
wifi. “Nene!” — — “Nre'qigit? — “Go, rattan-fia’wiim, e'tqi Doing. SCH — — Whatdoyodwast’®— Oh, caough of this! badly 
re'mki termeti‘fiu nrlhi-im vara'ta.” — “Qoqqof, taga'm, qanto’®*!” Nimtow'nén by the violently doiog | am treed bythe folk” — ‘Ugh, now then, go out!” He made him peopl oo goon 
kele'ts. Rio's, miele’ qa, milk res'qi'wkwi®. “Go, qamiii! Guq, 
bythekele. He went tothose per. hewent, by those he entered. fOh, be thanks. Ob out, forming the pectoris ving! thanksgiving iranian ceremonial cecemont mefko yeti? qimaiT, guna!”     
   
     
Ne/me mitaio’e, Neme ¢/nmen: “Ototototototoi'I” — A, ga, mikri, Again Again this time: “Ototototototof!”  — EA, sb, how is it, 
  who alile heme bear Nowih  Ouwao [E— song nanding, Qin've’r onmitikoi’pii, notas'qatikoi’pt, *Ototototototoi’ I” 
Theo from wikia, fiom underground, | *Otolootatooi'1” Quti‘ind mpma’tha maala gaalomlén. Crmqiq Enqa’n niqulile'tqin, Byome od mam neighbor he head f  Somepa then are noi, va'névan ere alomka. — ‘Taga'm, equliki qane'lhk! Tualomga'n, noting not not head. — Well now, voicelw make yourselfl © I head iy inenqulile’wkwi*!” — *M¢‘nko It'mia nilu¥a'n, mé'rkitrgn?® Qénve'r li'miia voice came to mel” — ‘Whence  sgain wouldhefiadl, the scamp?® Then agin onmidikoi pil. from within, 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 61 
it, all of them. “Oh, there! Stop it! Oh!" They felt afraid. Notwith- 
standing, it continued, “Ototototototoi’!” — “And now you may jostle me with 
your elbows, as before.” — “Ototototototoi/, otatatatatatai’!” With one breath 
the ke'lz swallowed all the people, the doers of violence. He killed them all. 
The end. 
  
“1, tu'n-nike’k. Ra¥nut?” Til-eime'wd iti quliqul. Naalomga' milo”. 1 
“Oh, bow cddealy! What! Gru-approachivg was voice. They beard tall wally “Taga’m, qapa‘ae’, gim!" A’yilha, kri.  Venlii, “Ototototototoi     
well, vow, conse, oh afer, cemainly. Sill, SOtoiotstolol  — 
“en-fata’l kirvete’ru ginetei’kitik.” — “Ototototototoi’, otatatatatatai’l” Viy&'irga 
this clbowjostling act on me." —  “Ototototototol’, oan 1* (Wilh hi) 
      Vr'yi-tivi'wunin re’mkin, termeériiflit, timi‘tkenénat. Pligi’! 
breathing he drew (the) people, the violeace-doers, he killed all of them. Finished. them in 
Told by Viyé'nto the Blind, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
10. (U'mqiqai's Adventure.) 
This, indeed, is not a story, it is actual fact concerning somewhat ancient 
times. A certain man lived in the olden time. In those days the kelE evil 
spirits were going around visible, just like our own people, quite openly. 
Then in the Telqa’p land one U'mqaqi and his companions were going 
somewhere, driving reindeer. There were three of them, all reindeer-drivers. 
So many they were. Then they saw a herd, and passed by on the outside 
of it. They also passed by houses. There were three houses, but nobody 
noticed them. They were quite invisible, were not seen at all by the kelet, 
just as at present an evil spirit is invisible to us. 
  
Qarémén i*tik It'miul, pr'iul meé telenye’pkin. E'nmen qol gitin, telen- 5 Tis oot indeed sory, (ea) some of od fime. Then tome was, intheakd on we ye'p im ami. Cit vai ka'mak ke'le sétaka'ta nilei’wuqin, qinu’r vai murgin lime indeed Ofyore oul spirit hele intheouside tmvelld, like Po re/mkan, Etéaka'ta len. people, in the outside only enrqa'm Telga'pik rai Umqaqaimti geke'alt mifkri geeke'nrtkulinet, Tha lneTotp: tere Ungioli nd ring rein whores hey ere divin, 
  companions ad 
fiiro’rgart, fifro’q geke'filit, en‘fi'nmitke’lit knqana’t. E’nmen lu'ur vai fielvil 
re of hem, hee dog oll so many they were. Thew alo herd 
tm nk Ralvilinolha'ta niala’qénat yara’ghi, ¢nmen firo’q ya'rat va'névan 10 there by the herd’s border they passed tothe houses; then three houses, mot at all

----

62 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
After that they passed by a pile of household things! past some luggage 
and loaded sledges. Some had their reindeer tied up there. Then U'mquqai 
untied his own thong, one of young-walrus hide. He discovered a grassy 
hummock on the ground. To this hummock on the ground he tied the thong. Then he tied his reindeer to the end of this long thong, and let them 
go. Only the end of the thong remained fastened to the hummock. So, 
then, U'mqtigai's reindeer are tied to the end of a long thong of young-walrus 
hide, let out to its full length. 
After that U'mqiqii and his three companions sat down, with their faces 
toward the entrance of one of the houses. The kelet in the house were 
cooking food. They hung up a kettle. One kelli-man was working on the 
curve of a sledge-runner. He was bending it quite a little. A kels-woman 
was cooking food. She was very pretty. 
She went out and looked around. Then she entered, and said, “Oh,   
a'nlu¥net, eLe eu'rretki, kele'ta va‘mevan elu¥ki. Qinut mergma’n fg 
Geyser ey dso bye sks al tesa Like wu appeac to them, Ke'let Seen. pretent 
Ka'mak vanbvan owen, evil spit mot at all is not visible. Gik, Enqa’'m Enga’n magrnafiok ine‘fik, o'rgut getinedie'vin; qu'ttrgm On em the byaploof bythe sedge © loaded, of the others (house! hold things) luggage, 
fan gaat gewkuvinet. Enqa'm Umgiqilin aflhm, qiéckithn gargien. scindees + a tied up Ungaqads  toog, | youngovalasthoog tied. Nutes-qikin tf mlalhin. Tumbelhts mute vqik ne gewku'in i'lhin. On the ground a hummock. Tobe hammock on the ground there he tied thethong, Enqam qora™ Enki genivleulin, Eo'mitkingrpti genilhiLin, En‘qa'm Then thereindecr there fos loog (rope) by the cod he fastened, then he atin, wga'en vai; em-iilhin nuwottva’qén tmkik. Enqam amt Umqigaiin helet them go; mlyhethong remsaed ach Ton do Uses 
qa’at #&'lhr-to'mitkmik fian qd‘¢ekithik newku'tinet niuleu néulawryiia. 
reindeer on the thoog’s end onayousgwalrus arc tied to st a long to the loge five (distance 
En'qa’m vai fian tné/ggé nuwagetva’qénat Umqiqii'mti firo’rgart 'nkr 
Thea toward the they sat down U'maiqai and the three of them there. eatrasce. others 
Enqam nuwiqinet radiku Enqaa’t tm kelet, mikukeiwuqinet. Enqa'm Then they are cooking in the howe those kel, they are hungiog vp Then he Kee, kalai'ia, — qla’uléiiin, Enqa’n, — ofrgukén ungrrgilhmn nineteikaqin, Enfa’q 
  bya kel, — ama he, | — ofwsledge rummerk eve he is preparing, sndthere maé-ya’a ninenkefiew'qin; En'qa’m fe‘us'qit nuwiqin, ga e€nmen nite’ngin enough far ho is bending it; then the woman is cooking, ih them  preny one teg-ne’us'qit. sice woman.   
+ Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 177.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 63 
oh! as compared with yesterday, we feel ashamed.! Oh, my! we are terrified 
(We call superstitious terror also shame.) The woman entered, and said, 
“Oh, we feel ashamed, we are terrified!” — “Oh, how strange you are! 
Wherefore this shame? Good gracious! what is oppressing us so? And it 
was only the men who came. “Oh, how strange you are! You feel terrified. 
But what is oppressing us so” Then U'mqiqdi pointed with his finger at 
the woman. Immediately shefelt a stinging pain, and could not breathe freely. “Oh, oh, oh!’ — “Oh, how strange you are! What is oppressing 
us so again? Then let us make haste! Oh, something is oppressing us!” 
Then U'mqaqai and his companions fled far away. (We call such a 
departure to a distant point a “flight”®). The others quickly untied their reindeer; but U'mqaqai’s reindeer tightened the noose, so that he could not 
  
Enqa’m ni‘ntogén, nitapitkoiiogen, nresqiugin. *Gokkol'l aivé’kénak Then she goos ow, she looks on, she antes. “Oho! (a comparison) i YEmerday mumarrkilaarkan, ttt, mit imgumgeerkin’ (yémgumgaltirgin 1m Airkilate we we feliog shame, wonder, we are (superstitions tear as shuns gelhi &a'ma mergma'n).  Nre's-qiugin reuse. "SGug, mmr arian, an Aachen abo by uw). Shecmen the wommn. Ob, we ar feling shame, mic mgumge’erkin I” — “Gu, &tqalvamevaluteré! lam furkilatn wo'tén? we see terifed!”  —  %Ob, quite strange being are you! Wherelore shame this? ma'ngén im, re'qd narantimla’arkn, guq?’ QALii Enqa'n ora‘wétat ge'pkivinet. Good gracious! by what are we pressed upon, oh" Meantime those men are come. 
Gug, vai, teqalvamva'litere, go! yémgumgotio'tk. Narantmla'n-me'rt “On, quite strange being are you, oh! you began to be temified. Are we presed upon regi? Enqa’m enqa’n Umqiqaina rilhidigiwe'nnin dc‘us'qat. E'nmen Iw'ur by wh Then there by Umgsaal witha fogs spoinedat the woman. Then but gripgi®, awgéntoyanvuka. “Ge ge gel’ — “Tnedettu’ri, re'qa lms Sheeting. could nox breathe fredly, SOB, oh, Oh" — “Wonder ae you, bywhai again og pein, nanumlanmik?  Mingaita’urkin guni. O, narantimla’n-me’ré reqs!” we are pressed wpon? Let us make haste Indeed. Oh, we are pred pon by whatl® Eqa’m Enqa’n Umqaqiinti geginteu'linet, (ginta‘wkurge ge'lhd ga'nqan ron 
    Then those  Umqiiqui and his fled away, (a fight we eall pn aro] awkwa'tirgin). E'nmen qu'ttrgin qa‘at peieqdi nerrinet, na‘qam a‘men Bdge, Then bydeolln be ick ve wil, Bove 
Umquqaiin nelhigét qaat gat/mlénat r'rig nénalwaw'qén. Qanve’r En-in: Unguqiis down with reindeer wer tghtenod wnte. he could not, | Therefore thus he thong (hem) ga'nqan riéitinteunin Ailhin. enfin’ fa‘an qinve’r qa‘at kilhe'nninet. Guq! ee ry be pall evr ty ons Tone sit Ge be loot OB 
  
+ Skankin (“thon art ashamed") is also seed a5 8 synonyme of yimgunge'rkin (“thon feclst sper. stitous fear”); of. also p. 39. + Remack of the namator. 10

----

64 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
untie them. Then he pulled the noose over the grassy hummock, and thus loosened his reindeer. 
water. They fied, all of them. The ground became soft, like Nevertheless they came to their house. The end.   
Amen 1m mon Ao‘on_ gegi'nteulin. 
  Nute'sqin 1m guthe'sin, qanu'r mimil ike   
grew soft, water Howerer, Sor fac) hey fd away. The gonad gene’uin.  Guq, amen tm ani pukiTgat pmgra’k. Erre'ttegin. became, Ob, however, they came to thei oss. End's limit. 
Told by Qo'tirgin, a Maritime Chukehee man, in the village of Mi'srqan, November, 1900. 
11. (The Adventures of the Brothers)! 
A company of brothers went to sea 
in a boat. They were caught by a 
foul wind and carried away to another 
land. They lost their way in a dense 
fog, but at last they sighted land. It 
was an extraordinary land, a quite 
dark one. They spoke thus: “Oh, my! 
we have come to a strange land.” 
They walked for a while, and saw 
people that were gulls. The gulls 
could also speak in the manner of men. 
“Oh, here are those people from 
the mainland!” — “Yes!” — “What 
is the matter with you?” — “We were 
badly treated by the wind.” — “Oh, how 
terrible I” — “But we are dying!” The 
Gull people said, “You shall not die. 
Go down slowly along that sea-beach 
yonder, then you will not die. Indeed, 
fon your way] there is a stranded car- cass (lying on the beach). You must 
not eat of it. Otherwise you will die. 
When you shall have passed it by, 
then you will see the carcass of a 
hunch-backed whale (Megaptera bois) 
stranded (on the beach). You may eat 
some of its liver.”   Yitemre'tti gettwile’Linet, yo'a leu- 
le'wa gelhilinet, qolé’nota’gtr genle- 
te'Linet, gaifiatimiitulénat, nu'tenut 
nelu’s'n  alvamvalm  nuu's-qigin. 
I'wkwi't Enfio’t: “Guq, ma’nken tim, 
a'lva-nota’gtt nrlgin-mur.”  E’nmen 
qaia’qad tle’s%t.  Ya'yara‘mkm ne- 
“sn.  Gik, ta'ma nuwéthau'qaat 
orawéra’-mél. 
“Gug, emu? — *Gug, 11" — 
“Re/qalitu’ri?’ —* Yo'ya leule’wu ge'lhi- 
mur. — “Guq, ma‘nkén im.” — “Gug, titefet, mitvi'mik.”  Ya'yaqa ni‘unet,® 
“Qar¢'m quwik. Gagan afiqa- 
&o'rmr y¥'ta rerkile’fitky, qar&m que 
wivtik. Mitel tlanvu va'rkin rin, 
ene’ aqamr'tvaka qi'tyitk, En-fatal 
tm revi‘ntik. Enqa’n raala‘mitkr, En 
faq kipuritu relu¥itks, qaponto'tk 
ki'tkit.”   
This tale represents «clever intermixture of some elements of Russian or Tarko-Mongol ori others which are ge * This is Chakehee.   
  al construction of the Chukebee active verb, — the subject in the cases Auctori 
    object in the nominative; and the verb agrees with the object, — but certain prefixes and infixes in the stem of the verb refer to the subject, and agree with it. 5

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
They were quite hungry when they found the carcass of the hunch-backed 
whale. They ate of its liver. One of 
the brothers was [a fool, even] quite 
foolish. (He said) “I wish we could 
eat a little more!” The eldest brother 
said, “(What you have eaten) is enough. 
You would die.” They departed again, and saw people 
that were gulls (Zarus glaucus). “Oh, 
where are you from? — “We were badly treated by the sea. We have lost 
our country. And so we are dying.” — “Indeed, you shall not die. Go down 
again slowly along the seashore. There 
you will see the stranded carcass of a 
whale (Balanoptera velifera). You 
must pass it by. Then you will see 
another carcass, that of a sealion 
(Eumetopias Stelleri). Of that you 
may eat your fill.” They departed from there, and saw 
the stranded carcass of a whale. They 
passed by it; and the foolish brother 
said again, “Oh, let us eat of it!’ 
The eldest brother said, “Such is- he, 
the quite foolish one. — You (actually) 
want to dic” They left there again, 
and saw people that were gulls of a 
smaller size. 
“Oh, here are those people from 
the mainland I” — “Yes!” — What 65 
Gitee'ultt tim fian, ki‘pu-ri'zu nelu”s'n. Pontoat. Qol #m yorgimta’qithin Enqa’m yicemre'tkin, ¢nmen yorgé'tu- wa'hthn. “Guq, iv'ka qaia‘qah min- 
qamrtvarkm!” mneelin iim i‘wkwi', 
“Gund, ratanaufin. Revi tm 
ELO'n.” 
Gu, neme ewkweltydt. Enfa’q 
qa’po-ya'yara'mkin nelu¥a'n. “Guq, 
meéiko'kénat? — “Etqi aiga’ta leu- 
le'wu gelhemu’ri. Nu'tenut mu'rgin 
mit’ mnéwkwa’n, mitvi®mik.” — Gu’ 
ni, qarém quwi'tk. Ne'me ye'ta 
rerkilefitkr afiqa’-¢o’rmik, keg-ri'Lu re- 
lu”firtkr, Enqa’n raala’firtki, qol ne’me 
reluviitki, o’1aq, Enfa’q Enki qagti- 
qamr'tvatik.” 
Enqo’rom ewkwe'tyd't, keg-ritu ne- 
Iu¥s*n, naa’laa’n, ¢'nmen ne’me yorgim- 
qh niugin, “Guq, a‘mén tm 
minqamr'tvamik.”  me’eld  nini'ugin, 
“sn-fifnvalithin wo'tqan,  yorgimta’- 
mat amravétha'nia  nalitha'tyet” 
Guq, ewkwe'tyst En'qo’ro, qa’po-ga'ha- ra‘mkin nelu¥s'n. 
“Gug, a’nuwai, em-nu/firtat I” — ¢ Gk, 
  
is the matter with you?” — “We were badly treated by the sea.” — “Oh, then move on slowly. You will see the 
stranded carcass of a white whale. Do not eat of it. After that you will find the stranded carcass of a walrus. You may eat your fill of that. That place is near to a settlement. A strong man lives in it.” They departed, and saw the stranded   1” — “Re‘qalitri?’ — “Afiqa’ta leu- 
le'wn gelhrmuri’ — *Gug, etenur yea qile'uk. Pureriiu relu¥iitks, 
end’ aqamrtvaka, rrka-réto relu”- futks, enhatal tm qalhéqamrtvatik. 
Nige't- Enqa'n Eméckin genimlin. vugin ora’wéran.” 
E'nmen  ewkwetyd't 
  30

----

66 
carcass of a white whale. They passed it by. The foolish brother said again, “Let us eat!” The eldest brother again gave him a scolding, and said thus [spoke to him]: “What do you want, you greedy one?” They passed by it again. Then they found the stranded 
carcass of a walrus. They ate a full 
meal of it. 
After that they travelled a little 
longer, and then landed. They brought 
their boat to the shore and buried it 
in the sand, so that it was not to be 
seen. Then they slept. They awoke 
(in the morning), and, lo! a man was 
walking along the shore. He was full of fear. Now he would come near, 
and again he would flee. 
The foolish brother was quite eager. 
He said, “Let me catch him!” The 
eldest one said, “Wait, wait!" They 
were keeping him back like a dog. 
Then the other man approached again. 
The foolish one rushed at him, This 
foolish brother was also very strong. 
“Oh, let us kill him!" — “Wait a 
bit! We will question him first.” 
They kept him down on the ground. 
Then they asked him, “Are your people 
numerous Yes!” — Have you 
strong men? — “Yes, one strong 
man, and he does much violence. He 
takes away everybody's provisions.” — 
“Oh, do not tell him about us! We 
will visit him.” 
Evening came again. They sent 
the foolish one to get provisions. He 
went, and stole provisions from a cache. 
He came back and brought a load of 
whale-skin, ever so big. “Egegegef, 
1 was almost up to their houses!” — 
“What did you do that for? Do you    
  
  BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
nellu’n, naallan; ne’me yurgimte'q 
g&ufiolén: “Minqamr'tvamik.” Ne‘me 
ineeli  wefiele'nnin, wkwi® Eniot, 
funin, “Raqétha’tya'm, qagamitvat- 
ha'tya"? Ne'me naallan. Qol ne'me 5 nelu'n rirkaréto, ¥nki gagami'tva- 
lenat. 
Qaia'qafi Gm tle dm fpea't. 
A¥ttwet nenvmpetmn, nute’sqi nulu'w- 
yuwgi'n aurrnk&’gtr. Gk am enmen 
yriga'tyat. Kiye'wkwt. E'nmen lu'ur 
qla’ul a‘fqa-Sormiyé‘wkwi ye'tyi®. En 
men nirndqin. Qaia’qadi eur neimeu’ 
qin, ¢'wkurga niginteu'qin. 
E'nmen yorgimta/qithm ya®rat nig- 15 
gi‘ariqin. Niugin: “mipenfra®n.” me’elm 
ni'ugin: “Yau, yau!” E’nmen qanu’r 
a¥ttin aré’ta nrntiqin, qén've’r ne'me 
eime'wkwit, qol ¥'nkr qla’ul, yorgim- 
t'qitha gakithnta-p/nhilén. Na'qam 20 
dm niqe’tvugin. 
“Guq, miarnmii‘an.” — “Yau, yau! 
miniméiloatn.”  E'nmen  garitt¢’ién. 
Namiulo'a®n.  “Ni'mkiqin im tu'rgin 
re'mkin?” — “1” — “Germe&ilin?’ — 
1! Eane'nie'n e’rmetn. E'wkurga m 
won vai nitermete’ngin, em itke’ti 
nine'ntiqin ge'mge-nikin tei'n-fi-yr'rn.” — “Guq enfie’ a'tvitkoka. ELOm tim 
vai mirraio®fimn.” 30 
  Ne‘me wulqitvi¥’. Yorgimta'qithin 
nenii‘ui'n takethe'n. E'nme fian qati’. 
E/nmen upeqe’myik getule’vin, Puki'rgit. Eun miske'mil meinelin gétélhryfin 
ninmtiqin,  *Egegegei’, kimek vai 
yara'g nrlqatiim.” — “ELo’n Gm ra- 35

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
want to die?” Thus spoke the eldest 
brother, as before. 
Morning came. A man from that 
place paddled out in a canoe. The 
canoe was quite large. He caught 
many seals. They looked into his 
canoe, and the canoe was filled [sepa- 
rate boat] (with seals), among them 
thong-seals. “Hallo! haul me up on 
shore!” The people did not hear. So 
he landed. He was very angry. He 
carried a walrus-penis. With this he 
began to strike about among all the 
people there, the neighbors. 
Then he went back to the canoe. 
“Haul me up on shore!” Of course 
the people knew better now. So the 
entire number went to the seashore. 
He was taking the thong-seals with 
one hand, [with a single hand,] and, 
sitting in the canoe, was hurling them 
ashore. So strong was he. 
The foolish one said, “Oh, indeed! 
1 shall be able to manage him all right.” 
— “Now, there! be quiet, will you?” 
They came there in the evening. A big 
jawbone house was standing there. 
The house-master was squirming upon 
his back in the inner room. Then he 
saw them. “O guests!” — “Yes!” — 
“To-morrow we will arrange a thanks- 
giving ceremonial.” 
They passed a night there, and the 
people were arranging the ceremonial. 
The master brought in a big stone. 
They entered, and the entrance was 
closed. The foolish one spoke to the 
other brothers. “Oh, but they are 
going to kill us!” All these men had 
ermine-skins hanging down from their 
belts. 
Meanwhile the lamps were put out. 
9—JUSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VIL   67 
qieha’tya’, am ravé%ha’nia” Pe'nin 
meer, 
igo. en'qe’kin aunralydin gett- 
wile’in.  E’nmen yanta®twithin ni 
mei’engin.  E'nmen  gameémiloTarén. 
A¥ttwuy&'aki migite'qin, e'ur tm geyr- 
rerin a¥ttwet, yanra'twr'yfin, re‘en wnel. 
Guq, nuwadéi’piqén: “Yago, qénag- 
ta'tyink.” Aa’lomka i‘tilit tm. E’nmen 
fipeli. Gandai’pulén. E'nmen ye'gr- 
Eh rr'rkinin, €nmen  nim-tu'mgit 
Tnqa’n qla’ulté, tatai'vawa yirkryvu- 
ninet. 
E'nmen ne'me, yania'twe'ti qatr’. 
“Gug, qineriule’tyttk.”  Minkri re‘mkin genfméeulin. E'nmen qarmus% ora’ 
werat adqa’form¢’t. E'nmen vai git- 
Kai'pii ninei'mitqin u'nelti Enna’n-mr'nga. 
Qon-mrnga len: amenodt'tr nineni’ 
titqugin wa'qeta. Ya“rat mqe’tvugin. 
E'nmen  yorgimta’qithm  ni‘ugin: 
“Guq, qai've-m flan me’éenkl tre'ntr- 
fin.” — “Gu'na, ilu’kd qatva’rkin an.” 
Wulqitvii®. Qa'tya't. E'nmen eur 
walqara’hm. E’nmen #m eur nuur- 
mva’qen requ. E'nmen  Iuninet. 
“Guq, re/mkilit.” — “Gk, 1" — “irga’ik 
tm ELo’n mom‘ mk”   
  
Qiye'wkwit Lo’n markt. E'nmen 
wukwulhr'yfin ra‘tvinén. Gi, res-qi- 
wkwa't. E'nmen trtul nanma'tya'n. 
Yorgimta'qiha yi‘¥emit-tu'mgit ruwe- 
thawa'nnénat.  “Guq, ELon vai nan- 
mirkme'mik.”  Iméetu’kin tm nelhi- qigti milo’ ora'werak rméik geniti- 
Linet. 
E'nmen ami e’ekit genpiiiku‘wleet, 0 
30 ® 5

----

68 
That stone was a very old one. It 
was covered all over with dried blood. 
They brought it in. The guests put 
on their ermineskins (in the dark). 
After that they burrowed [themselves] 
in holes under the bases of the house- 
poles. Meanwhile the master was 
swaying in the dark in a ceremonial 
dance, and the stone was clattering all 
around in the house, “Pw, pw!” 
He ceased swaying, and said, “Oh, 
where are the guests” and in a moment 
they were in their former places upon 
the pillow. “Light the lamp!" The foolish one said, “Oh, oh! but it is a 
good merry house for thanksgiving 
ceremonials.” — “Oh, oh, how wonder- 
ful! Oh, my! which way have they 
gone? Oh, there! let us try it again!” 
They brought in some slabs of whale- 
bone. They were covered with dried 
blood. They were really murderous. 
‘Then, again, “Oh, put out the lamp!” 
They put out the lamp. Those men 
again concealed themselves in the same 
place. The master swayed again in 
his dance; and those slabs of whalebone 
were doing thus: “Cig, cig” Thus they clicked. If these men had remained 
on the surface, they would have been 
cut down by the whalebone slabs. 
Again he called, “Oh, cgegegegei'!” 
They were sitting in their former places. 
“Oh, where are the guests?” — “Here 
we arel” — “Oh, oh, wonderful!" 
Again the foolish one said, “Oh, oh, 
my! but it is a good merry house for 
thanksgiving ceremonial!” — “Oh, 
again!” They put out the lamp again. 
This time they fled upwards, close to 
the vent-hole. 
Then a sling began to hurl stones   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
wukwulhr'yfin Enga’n telenye’pkin mu'- 
Li gakituvellen, gamoit'pilen ripet. 
Na'tvia'n tm fian. Iméeduw'kin nell 
hiqigti naipmat. maki uttamyiki- 
vala'ki tro'othik geres-qiu'ruleet. En- 5 men ant aunra’lin wus'q/métku gem- 
finitu’lin, amen ant wukwulhr'yiim 
  lemvaki mpegla‘qén yara'étku: “Pw, 
pw!” 
Guq, mAinidu pa'aé, iwkwi': “Gik, 10 
mi re/mkilt? Luur qutti Eagan 
pe/ninck nelha’t fotrtkink.  “Elek   
qinmle’wkutki!” E'nmen yorgimta'qs- 
hn gitulin: “Gug, a'mén tm kako. 
Taii-qalomatran’ — “Guq, amen 15 
tm pion ttefet! mankén tm! 
mifke'ti nata‘rkmat.  Gug, lata'm 
li'miia.” 
enfa’q viutti nana'tvinat. Ne‘'me 
enviin gamoétkituwe/lénat, qaLii qua 20 
Enga’nat tei'nicit. Ne‘'me: “Gik, ek 
qanpifku’utke” Nenpi'ikui'n. Ne'me 
pe'ninek  a‘téa’t i‘gitkinet qla’ulté. 
Ne'me  gemiiiniculin.  E'nmen  a’nt 
véu'tithit Endi'n ni'tqinet: “Cig, Gig.” 25 
Nigentiqe'tkuginet. Enqan ora’werat 
ea nrftvanat, ni'tvitkui'vunet viv'ta. 
Ne'me e‘nmen: “Gik, egegegegei’” 
Pe'nine waqero’a’t. “Gug, emi re'm- 
Jit? — Wotqana™ more.” — “Gi, 
ka'ko, ute’fiet.” Ne'me yorgimta'ql- 
Eh gi'ulin: “Gr, ka'ko tite'fiet, taii- 
kalo™miié-ra’n.” “Gik, li'mfia’l” 
Ne'me eek genpikuwlin. Eafa’q 
girgo’l gene’teet mno’urgi-qa’ca. 35 
E’nmen an wr'yowr yoro'étku wu'kwa.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
about in the sleeping-room, so that the 
jawbone house was shaking. Again 
the master ceased swaying. Oh, they 
were sitting in their former places. 
“Oh, where are the guests? Probably 
this time (they are killed).” — *Oh, 
indeed, here we are!” — “How wonder- 
full Light the lamps!” Again the 
foolish one said, while the lamps were 
being lighted, “Oh, my! what a good 
merry house for a thanksgiving cere- 
moniall We feel merry.” 
“Oh, bring the Maritime woman for 
a dance!” They brought her. Again, 
“Oh, put out the lamp!” The old 
woman danced. They hid themselves 
under the stone. Oh, oh! the jaw- 
bone house swayed to one side, and 
even the ground bent to one side. 
This time the foolish one was hit upon 
the head. 
Then again, “Enough! Light the 
lamp!” Oh, they appeared, and the 
head of that one was covered with 
blood. Then one of the guests, the 
eldest brother, said, “Oh, now it is 
our turn. Listen! And so also put 
out the lamp!” He began swaying 
in a ceremonial dance, and a big stone 
from a mountain rolled into the jaw- 
bone house. And it crushed even all 
the (stands made of) ribs of whale. 
There was a great clatter. The stone 
rolled about like thunder, and still more 
thunder approached. 
“There, enough! You will hit the 
children upon the head!” Still it con- 
tinued. And as to the strong man, 
the present performer of the ceremonial, 
the stones that were rolling around in 
his house also broke his bones and 
killed him.   69 
nuwiyotkifiau’qén, ripe’t walqara'¢hin 
nilule’tqin. Neme miinidu pa‘at®; 
gik, peninek wa‘qea’t. “Gug, emi 
re'mkiit?  E'tim git” — “Gei, gun, wotqana’-me'ré) — “Tite'net! e'ekit 5 
qanmle'wkutkt.” Ne/me yorgimta/qr- 
hin turecke'tik: “Go, titeet, tai 
kalo-mfé-ra’n. Muttehite’erkin.” 
“Gik, afiqa’kén mprie’'wqii qagtr’- 
qtki puturelu’  E'nmen na‘guatn. 10 Ne'me: “Gik, cek qanpinku’utks” 
Inpific'wqii geputurelin. Wukwu-tro'- 
otht Enke’érku nelhit. Kako, ka'ko, 
walqara’éhin tm garkiditkolén wu'rr1, 
ne'me nute’sqin ripe’t garkititkollén. 15 
E'nmen qol vai gaivalponaulen yor- 
gumta’qithin. 
E’nmen nme: “Rattan-fiau’fiin, e’ek 
qéanmle’'wkutkr.” Gi, pratigatyit, eun 
nimuLityqin leat. Gug, Enqa’m re'm- 
kal {wkw, meelin: “Guq, kita'm 
me'rginfaq. Qapalomt¢lhitk. E'nmen 
am ne'miqii eek qanpinku'utke” 
Gund ani gemdiniéulin, enmen a'nt fiei’kin wu'kwulhn gekuwlrtkurulin wal- 25 
qara’gt. E'nmen ami qinve’r miat- 
koro'fifioa’t nikeet, re‘win wellqitd. 
E'nmen ant witrgirgiéhin.  Nukuwl(l- 
qigin wukwulhiéhin, qanu’r yrlqeen, na’qam pa'néna venlii nuurgeimeuqin. 30 
    “Taga’m, rattan-iau’sm. Nene'net 
qaivalponaurkin®’tki.”  Guq, enmen 
venlii. E’nmen {gitkin enqa'n main 
armatiyam wi'kwa kuwlftkunvu ya 
raft gelhilin, genti‘meulin, ganmilen. 35

----

70 
Then a little old man, a neighbor 
of his, called out, “Ogogogof, now the people will have a rest from game- 
robbing in a quite different manner!” 
for this one was robbing from his 
neighbors all their provisions. 
The people were very glad. The 
brothers ceased (killing). The old man 
said, “On the seashore (on your way) 
lies a big thong-seal: it lies on the 
shore with half of its body out of the 
water. Do not pass by it at a distance, 
but go quite close to it, just by the 
tip of its nose. If you pass at a 
distance, it will right away kill you. 
‘When you shall have passed it, farther 
on there is a young seal lying on the 
shore, out of the water up to the middle 
of its body. Do not attack it, only 
pass it by. When you have passed 
it, you will see there a young thong- 
seal. You may attack that.” 
Oh, indeed, they departed. They 
passed the first one close to the tip 
of its nose, and saw the young seal. 
The foolish one spoke again: Oh, 
we are too hungry! I wish we might 
kill this one!” The eldest brother said, 
“You are so greedy!” — “But it is 
because we are hungry.” — “Such a 
one are you, that you cannot keep 
your big greedy jaws quiet.” 
They passed it, and saw the young thong-seal. They slew it and had a 
meal. Just then they saw that a man 
was coming down the river. This was 
the master of the first thong-seal (they 
had passed) on their road. He asked 
them, “Have you met nothing on the 
way? — “Nothing.” — “Oh, there! 
he has not seen them!” 
They departed again. This time   'BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Enqa’m npina’hiqii, mtu’ mgiqai 
eifie'utkui’: *Ogogogoi’! Em elvula’q re/mkin ra-ginnd g-nimpafatifio’8!” mi'f- 
kei tein-fil-yrrm gi'tkelin maalen. 
Enqa’m tm gakataraulén dm re'm- 
km. Paaa’t. mpmahaqai gi'ulin: “Afiqa’4o’rmi nel va'rkm mime'yEi- qin, Edn routttva’rkm anqa’-to’rmi. Ende rrowa'ta ataka qant/gitkr. 
Ven enkeggine't qata‘gitkr, wes'qi- shined qataguki  ¥aki rrowa'ta rata/fitky, v&'ts nara‘nminttk. Raala™- futks aan, qaime'mil Enkr rma'ga 
routttva’rkin.  E'nfie’ giinu ehika, 
lien qagala’gitkr, Enqa'm raala’fitks, Enqa’n qaiu'ner relu”iutkr.  xnga’n 
giinu qalhrgitke” 
Guq, qailhina’n-gén fian ewkwe'tyd't. 
Qol Enqa’n wesqathitie’t na'tan, qai- 
mémil ne'lu'n. Ne'me yorgimta/qichin 
&ulic’®®. “Gi, ya¥rat fio'tr mithrtteu’- 
mik. Tuk ficonqan minrnmiirkm!” 
me'eld unin: *Gaérétatha'tegi.” — 
“Mi‘tkdi qunum  muthitte’urkin” — 
“¥'niiu-wa'l-&-gt, apélharétha’tkil-&-git.” 
  Guq, ®nqa'n naalaatn. Qiiwnel ne'lu'n. Na‘nmitan, qamr'tvaa’t. Lu‘ur 
veemi ora‘weian keikele'tyl', Qari 
¥ngan Ergin tla'nvugén qol wel, 
mnkekin tn yetyl'. Qaiii pmle- 
nenat: “Va'névan regi qginelu*tik 
tila'nvuk? — “Va'névan.” — “Ka'ko, 
alm, inelu”kilinet.” 
Ne'me ewkwe'tyd't. Enfaq gno'n-

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 71 
they saw the Giant Bird! It sat crouching on the sea-beach. They 
passed it from the waterside. When 
they were moving at a great distance, 
(the bird stretched out its neck) and 
swallowed them, together with the boat. 
[They made promises, they were so 
frightened. They promised (to the 
spirits) a white-haired dog in their 
house. Then they came out through 
the anus (quite safe), only their heads 
had become bald (and they had lost) 
their hair. 
They departed again, and saw some 
people who were mice, who were 
digging earth. They dug out under- 
ground houses. They passed a night 
there. One old woman was still sleep- 
ing, — an old mouse-woman. The 
foolish one said, “Oh, we are suffering 
from thirst! 1 will go and have a drink in the house I” The eldest brother 
said, *(Go,) but do not play any foolish 
tricks!” 
Oh, he came to that house, and saw 
the old woman. She had her eyes 
closed, and had not hailed him at all. 
Then that man, the foolish one, stood 
(there for a while). Then he came 
near the old woman. He took out his 
penis and directed it toward her nose. 
Then she stirred up and snuffed around. 
She spoke thus, quite alone: “Oh, 
indeed! where does this smell here of 
husbands come from?” 
She moved on and snuffed around. 
Then the other one laughed. He 
laughed on the sly when going out of 
the house. “Oh, oh! who has made 
me a laughing-stock (of the people)? 
She, however, heard this low laugh of   gate nelu'n.  E'un adiqa’<o’rmi nikit- 
&tva’qen.  E'nmen gino'nétr na'tan. 
Ya'am tile’lit alimt lu'ur fian titqa nninet 
ga¥twuma.  E'nmen  génatva'Laat, kapéata'ultt, yara'kén &lhrrattn 5 
ga'tvillen, qryar’pi prntigityiit, kV me'k 
Ieutti gimdite'zinet kirvi'tti. 
Ne‘me ewkwe'tya®t, pipe/kilhi-re’mkin 
ne'lu'n, qitii notas-qa’urkit. E‘nmen 
nitada’qénat nota’sqirat. Enki ki'w- 
kwi't. E’nmen qol mpriie'wqii yrlqilin 
pipe’kilh npiie’wqii.  Nipe'a®t qunum 
Enki. Ne‘me Enga'n yorgimta/qichin: 
“Guq, mityrgreumik. E’nmen a‘mén 
vai mimiwkwiis-qiwkwi'n  yara'gti” 15 
me'eld i'unin: “Anim fan eleulewe’t- 
kilin I” 
Guq, qiti’ yara'gt. E'nmen mpi 
fie'wqdi Iunin.  Vilqam, va'névan 
¢nmen nirimeiAenin. E'nmen qla’ul 
Fok yorgimta'qehin  nitvetéa’qen. 
Qiinver reimeu'nin mpie‘wqai. E'n- 
men lolo yito'nén, Enkeggi yiqaak 
&/meeqai rulwinin. E'nmen gnmrl- 
kinek tai'gifufioi, ¢‘nmen tilv-a’minan : 
“Keke gu'nd, me’ikom li‘miia uwa’- 
qot#/tkiiioi 
     E'nmen eur a'tto‘ol nine/lqin nt gingin. E‘nmen gol im Enqa’n gatan fa'ufiolen. Lien gevinvuten-fie’ulin fmou'tr. “Keke, re/qa leule’wu ine'Thr?” 
Gaallomlén nqa’n ten‘aeulin vinvi:   
1 Concerning the Giant Bird of Chukchee mythology, cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 325.

----

72 
his. “Let his penis grow in length!” 
He went to the boat. His penis was 
growing very fast, his trousers were 
soon quite filled with it. 
He came to the boat, and his eldest 
brother scolded him. “I told you not 
to play silly tricks!” — *Indeed, 
played no tricks! I only saw an old 
woman who had not hailed me at all. 
All at once I took out my penis and directed it toward her nose. She 
snuffed around, and then said, ‘Whence, 
again, comes this smell here of hus- 
bands? Then, on going out, I laughed 
a little. She said, ‘Who has made 
me a laughing-stock? Let his penis 
grow in length!” 
“Oh, sorrows! Quick! let us push 
off” The boat was very soon filled 
with the penis. They tried to cut it 
off, but the remaining piece still con- 
tinued to grow. At last they were 
coming home. The eldest brother was 
a shaman. So the eldest brother ad- 
dressed that old woman, the mischiev- 
ous one. 
Oh, you old woman! thrust some- 
thing between your own legs!” Then 
the old woman (sat) down upon the 
ground undressed, and began to shove 
her posterior parts to and fro. She 
thrust into her vulva a splinter of wood, 
and so killed herself. 
Those men came home. They 
brought out into the open a shaggy 
dog and slaughtered it. Their wives 
had become decrepit from age. The 
foolish one, on landing, was already 
quite bloodless, because they were 
cutting off his penis all the time. 
As soon as they landed, they went 
to sleep. Then they turned to stone,   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
“Amen tm lolo niule’tys'n.” E‘nmen 
attwé'tt qatiio’s. E'nmen niqiurigin 
Iolo meiae’tik, kona'glifm pee nine- 
yirreltqin. fe'nii. 
E'nmen a¥ttwuk pitki’rt. me’eld aifa- 
la'tifonén: “Ne'wiq gi'wi En-fo’t: ‘eleu- 
lewe'tkilin.” — “Qai’vem ee eleu- 
lewe'tkéi. Erre¢ tm mprie’waai lua, va'névan ninerimeife’s’. Emite’t tm 
mnqa’n, loo trgton, yagaggét tm 
tinlwin.  En‘qa’m nitei'giagin, £n-qa’m 
gi'ulin: ‘M¢‘Bko-m lt'miia uwa’qoe't- 
kiffoi?  E’amen fitou'tr ki'tkit niten'- 
fie’w-i-tim. En°qa’m gi'ulin: ‘Re‘qi-m leu- Ie'wu inehil®. ma’n 1olo niule'tyan.’” 
“Guq unmu'i am. A¥qalpé, 
mine/lgimik.” Pere a¥ttwet nineyirre’t- 
qin lolo'ta. Eun nine’évigin, ne’me 
Zuwi'ptt nimei‘fietqin veolii. Qanve'r 
piikeérifio’a’t ya'rak. me’elin im Enqa’n 
eiiefilin.  Enfa’q mpiie‘'wqdi Enga’n 
leulewe’lin mne’eld gi‘ulin. 
  “Gu, mprie'wqii-i-git, &ini'tkin varé'- 
rg qoipitkoi'virkn.” E'nmen npi- 
fawqa’giin re‘en nute’sqak akérka 
mpugrilule’tqin.  enfa’q Ent tts 
nénoi'pitkugén ququr, uwi'g tmnen. 
  Qu'tti-m nqa’n puki'rga't. Rig-a*ttin 
nantoa’n, nd‘nmda®n. Eun gepelqiru- 
tewlinet fe‘wanti.  Yorgumta'qithmn 
lien: fiipene/fiu tefi-emu'tikd gene'tin. 
Mifikei a’'mkintéo lolo ninetvigin. 
Lien" fiped’t tm, yllqi'tyd’t. Enfa’q 
wukwu ganata’Lénat, lufiigge’wi 
 

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
and never again awoke. Oh, the end! 
The wind has been killed. 73 
net. Guq, pligi. Yoyo'ghm im ga'n- milen. . 
Told by Rike'wi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
12. (The Children carried away by a Giant) 
One time a man was hunting whales. 
And he killed a great number of whales. 
They departed in skin boats. Two 
children were playing on the seashore, 
— one a girl, the other a boy. The 
father was hunting whales. 
From the open there came a man 
in a canoe. He was quite big. He 
said to them, “Father said, ‘Go and 
fetch them!'” His paddle was very 
large. So he moved, (working) with 
the paddle, right ahead of the children, 
who were walking along the shore. 
Then he said to them, “Sit down here 
upon my paddlel”. They sat down. 
But he deceived them. 
He carried them away to the middle 
of the sea, putting them inside of his 
canoe. At last they saw a jaw-bone 
house, which for a long time had 
remained uninhabited. He put them 
in there. He also stopped up the 
venthole, and so left them quite in 
the dark. 
The young brother began to cry. 
The little sister was lulling him to 
sleep. They were thirsty. There was 
also no food. Then the little sister, 
groping around, found some old boot- 
soles. These she took, and put some 
of the stuff into the mouth of her 
young brother. Then the jaw-bone 
house became hoary with frost. It 
grew quite cold. She continued to 
rock her brother. At last he fell 
asleep.   E'nmen nire’uqin ora’wétan vé'tim 
re¥w néna’nmiiqén. En‘qa’m im ne’me 
gettwile’Linet. A’fiqa-fo’rmik nuudve’t- 5 
qinet fivnqaiti Ai'riq, qol Ae‘ekik, gol 
tm fi'nqdi tm qai've. Nire"ugin om 
  gin. 
Gno'ngiiptt yanta®twilin ye'tyi® 
    mmeisngin.  Iuninet, “Lg i'wkwi®: 10 
‘Qre’tnet.’”  E’nmen téwénai nimei 
Engin. Aftto'ofa nénata’qénat téwé'- 
nafata yara’gn qi‘tlt. Ni 
‘Wu'tqu quwa'qeuk téwénada'tkinik.” 
Qinve’r wa'qea‘t. Qari qun temyu'- 
gninet. 
  E'nmen gmo'nétr rilete'nninet, yan- 
fa¥twittku gayolaat. E'nmen walqara’- 
thin nelu¥a'n, pe'nin uid orawéra’ 
klen. Enke'diku yo'nénat. Rimo‘urgm 
ei'pmin, wus'qi‘métku, qo'npti péla- 
nénat. 
E'nmen rre'nyuqdi gatt’rgata. Ca- 
kr'tteqaia ninenile’tqin.  E‘nmen yrgrd; 
naqam ui'dd teki’éhm. Enqa’m penin 
qulte’tulti takr'ttéqaia nike'gegilifitku’- 
qinet, qan‘ver ninei‘mitmet En‘qa’'m 
manyou'ti ninenriwe'tqinet, qanve'’r 
walqarai'fin im kimya'tiio¢, qiLii 
geliflenrulin,  ¢nmen  ninenile'tqin. 30 
Qinve’r geillqavin ELe’nyuqii.

----

74 
The little sister was singing. And 
while she was singing, a small bright 
hole appeared on high. Then it ap- 
proached. Then it grew larger. She 
wakened her young brother. Then 
she put him outside (of the house) first. 
After that both escaped. The exit 
suddenly vanished. They looked 
around. They were outside. Open 
land was all around them. 
Then they saw some gull travellers. 
“Oh, do carry us away!” — “Let those 
who are behind carry you!” And really 
two gulls were moving in the rear. 
They called again, “Oh, do carry us 
away!” They carried them. They 
said, “We will take you away,” and 
they took them. 
The father was all the time going 
around their former playground. So 
they took them to that playground. 
The father came to the playground 
and saw the children. “Oh, where 
have you appeared from? What be- 
came of you?” — “Oh, a canoe-paddler 
took us away. He said, ‘Your father 
bade you come.” Oh, he is kissing 
them all the time! Then they said, 
“Gulls brought us.” 
They went to the storeroom and 
took out plenty of blubber, and with 
that they rewarded the gulls. The 
father simply ripped open a large blubber 
bag on the seashore. Then the gulls 
ate their fill of blubber. In the end 
they anointed both children, — one 
with ochre, the other with graphite. 
The one anointed with ochre lived. 
The one anointed with graphite died. 
Oh, the end!   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
E'nmen  mitipeifie’qin  Eakr'tteqai. 
Qinve’r a'mt a’un-tipaifiow’tr niEw’uqin 
kb'rgiqai wurre'ty® girgo’l. E'nmen 
ve'nlii geimeulin. E'nmen ant kuwa’n- 
Ee'nyuqii riggewennin. E'nmen 5 
ii ya'net ru‘unin fargmouti. E'n- 
men won ya'alt milo’ prntiqityd’t. 
Amiuta’tye® gitkin ftoyan. E'nmen 
lile’pitkud®t; fia’rgin vaiifio’a’t. Tilv- 
am-notai'fitn. 10 
E'nmen ya'yakit magla/it nelu¥net. 
“Gug, qeifie’tkuttk.” — “Gk, ni‘uginet, 
ma'n ya'aza.” Qailhma’ngét di'riq ya 
yakit ya‘ad1 nile/qiriet. Neme, “Qeifie’t- 
kuttk.” Neifie'net. “Gk, mmnlete’tk.” 15 
E’nmen e’un nenlete’tmet.    
  E'nmen Euigryiin a‘mkiniéo ootvé'n- 
vipa milei'wugin. Nentpkire'tinet 0o- 
vinvik en'qa’m peninek. 
E'nmen ELgryhin ootvinvéu qatr’; 
gr, luninet. “Go, mé'nko pratiqittk? 
Gere¥tu'ri i'ma?” — *Guq, yanfa®t- 
wila genlete'n-mu’ri. Ni‘ugin tm fiot: 
‘eLrgd yetryvut ne'ntik.’”  E’'nmen 
a'nr  ninukwet-u'uginet. E'nmen i- 25 
whwi't: “Ya'yaka gere/n-muri.” 
E'nmen opagamy#’ti qd'tyd't, mr't- 
qamit nagtola'tya’n, ¢'nmen Enta’q ya'- 
yakit namingukwa’arkiat.  E'nmen 
len Eurga Enga'n prgpig, mrtqat 
nénarra’qénat afiqa’-to’rmik. E'nmen 
ya'yak qamitvata’qén mr'tqak. En'qa’'m 
Enqga'n myirrawnénat, qol &e'wkwd, qol 
telheri’ti. Ce'wkwi yirra'tilin yegte'lhi', 
telheritd yirra'ln vi*i'.  Guq, Plagi’. 35 30 
Told by Q'tirgin, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village of Mr'srqan, November, 1900.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
13. The Raven and the Girls (Valvryarla'ma). 
One time a company of little girls 
found upon the seashore a little seal. 
Then Raven saw them. Therefore 
they put the little seal under their 
bodies. “What is that? — “A splinter 
of wood.” — “Still it has whiskers.” — 
“It is a whiskered splinter.” — Still 
it has eyes” — “It is a splinter with 
eyes” — “Still it has paws” — “It 
is a splinter with paws.” Then he pushed them apart. He 
took the seal and brought it home. 
(His house-mates) skinned it, had supper, 
and then went to sleep. Some cooked 
meat was left in the kettle. The little 
girls (came in the night-time), ate up 
(the ‘meat), then they defecated into the 
kettle. 
After a while the (Raven) husband 
awoke, and said to his wife, who was 
sleeping, “Eh, 1 am hungry! Give 
me some cooked (meat)” The wife, 
with eyes shut, stretched her hand 
toward the kettle and took the faces. 
“Oho! it is faces.” 
The company of girls staid outside. Raven put on his clothes, and called 
to his wife, “Give me my wretched 
bow, give me my wretched arrow!” 
They, however, were only the fire-drill 
and its bow. 
Oh, the little girls fled! “Grandpa, 
grandpa! we shall louse you, we shall 
louse you!” — Oh, what have I done 
to my little granddaughters! 1 have 
frightened them!” Then they loused 
him. When he fell asleep, they fastened 
a bladder under his anus, and then 
wakened him. “Ch, now wake up! 
10—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VoL. VII     7s 
E'nmen fiee’kkeqai-giniw afqa’&o’r- 
mk m¢milqai gelu’lin. E'nmen val- 
vryda Io¥ninet, napaqatt’ua’n mémil- qai. “Ra¥nut enga'n? — “Uttiqail’ — “Na'qam Enqa'n gelelu'qiglin.” — “Lelu'ttiqii” — “Na‘qam gelile'qi- gin" — “Lilu'ttigai” — *Na'qam ¥nqa’n geyc'kkiglin!” — ¢ Yegu'ttaqai.” 
  Upiniti'yvuninet, fund. I'tkenin, 
nra’gtannén.  Nenve'nfitdn, qamr't- 
vaa't, enmen geilqireet. Crmqik 
kuke'éiku eret mitva’qén.  Nee'kkeqaid 
nenui'viii®n, en'qa'm ku'kek natlaion. 
E'nmen uwa'qoteifin  kiye'wkwi®, 
ne‘wan tim {unm yrlqalin: “E, tgitte’- 
wkwi'k, gira'ntage”’.”  Qol itm e'nmen 
ylga koka’gti mrngilgm rilete’nnin, 
e/nmen e¥lef] pirinin. *Ogogo’! A'la- 
fin vai.” 
Nee'kkeqii-giniw im fa’rgm nitva’ 
qén, un Gm k&rgupge’ uwa'qué, ¢/nmen fawané’tr: “Qulu’rit qine’ilhit, 
quiv-ma¥qm  qineilhit”  Qatii tm 
fifleq, milhe'tkin Gm tifugin. 
Gug, e'nmen fiee’kkeqigti nigimteu- 
r'qinet: *Epei, epei’! Mil’, mlulu’1” 
— “Guq, fauru'wgoqagté tinraqa’ufio- 
nat? Tmayilha'ufionat” Enmen ne- 
mlu'a'n, geilgivin tm.  Kiye'uik nepe’- 
welity#'n, nenigge'wkwi'n. “Ege, 
qigge’wkwi', fic'oni¢ qallai‘olqewkwe?,

----

76 
You must defecate yonder on that 
good dry place” He obeyed and 
defecated. The feces fell down into 
the bladder, pat, pat! He turned back 
toward them, and saw nothing. 
Then he came home and said to 
his wife, ‘How very strange! I defe- 
cated over yonder, but I could not 
see my faces. Still they clattered 
down.” — *Well, now, turn to this 
side!” And there his anus had a 
bladder (tied to it). 
He called again, “Here, give me 
my wretched bow! 1 will shoot them 
down. Give me my wretched arrow!” 
He visited them again. “Grandpa, 
grandpa, eat some diarrhea excre- 
ment!” — I do not want it.” — “Then 
let us louse you!” — “Oh, what have 
1 done to my little grand-daughters!” 
He threw away the bow and slept again. They loused him and made 
him go to sleep. 
This time they fastened over his 
eyes some red tassels. Then they 
wakened him again. “Oh, go there 
and look at your house!” He obeyed again. He looked upon the house, and began to cry, “Oh, oh! the house is ablaze!” His wife went out and 
walked around the house, but saw 
nothing. “Look up here! Oh, your 
eyes have things fastened on them!” 
Again (he grew angry, and the girls 
called to him) “Grandpa, grandpa, let 
us louse you, let us louse you!” They 
loused him, and he went to sleep. 
Then they tattooed his face. After 
that they wakened him again. *Wake 
up, there! Have a drink of this clear 
water!” Then he saw in the water 
his own tattooed face. “I will marry   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
taikirgisqa’tkintk.” Gug, ¢/nmen qol 
ma‘an.  Aflaio’. E'nmen clit 
pewe’eiku pi'rkia't: pig, ne Nenan- 
tagalhilau'qaat, na’qam ui'Ad. 
  Ne'me ra’ghié, fie’'win om iunin: 
¢Ceq-a’lvam-va'lag, na'laioi’-giim fio’on- 
ko. EYIel lufilu” ti ine/ntr-tim. Na‘qam 
mipégla'qénat” — “Kita'm, raenté 
ql” Enqa'm Enga’n kiyem ge- 
peweli'Lin. 
Ne'me nga'n: *Qoro’, qulu’rr't qin€/ilhi", milqaineunet, eur qulu'ma®- 
qm. E'nmen ne'me yo'nenat: “Epe’, pirk-e*le] qanu'un.” — “Tinkiic'r- kin.” — Gik, mlulu’” — “Gug, fau- 
Lu'wgoqagtt tinraga’uionat.” E'nmen 
rit rintis'qi‘unin, nme yilgi'tyf’, nem- 
Iwan myrlqaqin.        
Wo'tqana  nawgémka'tmat lilek 
&evo’-penakat. Ne'me niniggewe'tqin. 
“No'onfé qacei'vutkui. Enga'n yara't 
qgit’gm.”  E'nmen hma’tan nme. 
Yara'fit gite'nin, vaiii’pie®: “Go, mei, 
yara’di kenye'tyi®.” Ne'win tim fito’e?, 
yarahi_nineke'mlilgin, na‘gam ui. 
“Qinegite® m nan. Lilet vai ga- 
wgémka'ténat.”   
Ne‘me: “Epef’, cpei’| Mul, mlulu’ Nemluan, yilga'tyi®. enra’q ri‘ake- lin. Ne'me niggewe'tyi'n. “Qrgge’- wkwi® vai. Tan&rgrmemlé'ti quwku- 3 Sisqi'wkwi®”  E'nmen zain uwi'k n- 
  kelilin mimlrétku lu¥nin.  *E’nmen

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
you, eh!” Still it was (no woman), 
but his own body and tattooed face. 
“Shall 1 bring my tent, ch?” Then 
he called out to himself, *She consents, she consents!” After that he went 
home. He began to break down his 
tent. His wife said, “What arc you 
doing?” — “Be silent!” — “Oh, but 
it is only your (own) face, that is tat. 
toed” — “Oh, you are jealous, you 
are jealous!” — “Really, your face is 
tattooed I” — “What do you want, 
what do you want?” 
Oh, he carried away the flat stone 
(anvil), together with the stone hammer. 
Again he came and looked down. “Here you are!” Still it is his own 
former face. He put down the flat stone. It went under. Then the stone 
hammer. It also went under. “Oh, I 
have married a wife from the Reindeer 
tribe! She accepted them!” Oh, now 
the poles, they floated on the surface. 
“Those she has refused! Now the 
tentcover!” It was carried down by 
the stream. “Now it is my turn.” 
When he was in the water, his head 
grew giddy, and he also floated on 
the surface. The stream carried him 
down the river. Oh, the skies are moving!" Still it was the stream that 
was carrying him away. Oh, oh! 
the skies are swinging” Then he was 
drowned. 
Told by Qo'tirgm, a Maritime Chukchee 
14. A Tale of the Raven 
Once (upon a time) there was a (young) girl, a daughter of Kuurkil* 77 
mimata’gir, va? Qui rnin uwik 
&initkin, lu¥lqal i*akeli‘n. 
“Guq, yara'it migtr'gan, va” E'ur 
tm enqa'n: “Valo'mirkin, valo'murkin !" 
Ena'n Gnit cur. E'nmen ragtid. 
Yara'fit riritko’fifonén, fie'wini: “En- 
fa’q re‘qarkm?® — “Equliki qatva’r- 
kin!" — “Geifdkeliy-gw, a'ttan.” 
“Krae'erkmn, kineerkm.” — “Gun, 
geitakeli'ygir Enga’n.’ — *Raqmo’e’, 
raquo’    
    
Gug, e/nmen imtilqatyi®, elh-ukwut, eur mpe'f. Ne‘me poki'rg, eetkui. “eke nitvai'-gir.” Pein unin {gitkin l¥lqal.  Elhwkwut rkedkele'uninet. 
wgewe'tydt. Enta’q mped.  Ne'me 
wrgewetyi®. *Gug, fautuwa’-faw tima’- taa'n, kiméo'térkinat. Guq, nqa’n 
tm uttimit”  Pudlqe’wkwit. “Go, ¥nku Irgninet. Gi, Enfaq, rette'm.” Ne'me nanliplatya'n. Gu, gim raq 
tim.” 
E'nmen le‘ur relinin mémliikou't, ¢nmen wri puulqe’wkwi®.  Prhila veemd néna'nliplatqén.  “Guq, even iluleerkin Qari ELom  velemi néna‘nliplatqen.  *Qa’ko, qako, even yikirgala‘arkin.”  Qan-ver pilqa'tyi. man, in the village of Mi's‘qan, November, 1900. 
Ku'urkil* (Ku'urkil Lt‘mal). 
E'nmen fie‘us'qt, Ku/urkilin fie‘ekik, mga geinelin gene'undulin, A'men     
| These are the appurtenances of the Chukchee # The mythical name of Raven. It is pronou Kufurlal, Quarkdl, Quurqil (ef. Vol. VII of this sei   
  hearth and home (cf. Val. VII of this series, p. 188). different ways, sccordiag to the localities: Ku'rkil, 15, Footnote 2). 
  
© 
0

----

78 
Her father made a public call for suitors. 
Everybody assembled, suitors from 
every land, — the Wolf, the Wolverene, 
the Bear, the Wild Reindeer, the Mouse, 
the Fox. 
The Hares also heard of the news. 
They spoke thus: “Oh, let us also go 
and be suitors!” (One of them said) 
“Oh, no! Why, 1 have no sledge!” 
— “Oh, well, do try!” Then he 
consented. 
They came to the place. A rod 
(was set down as a target for a shooting- 
contest among the suitors). Then the 
others began to shoot. The Wolf shot, and could not (hit the mark). Then 
the Wolverene shot, and could not (hit 
the mark). Then the Fox also could 
not (hit the mark). Then the Mouse 
shot, and could not (hit the mark). 
After that the Hare shot with a bow 
of grass. He hit the rod, and it fell 
down. Then they scrambled to see 
who was the strongest; and all said, 
“Oh, let her sit down first on my 
sledge!” The Wolf said, “Let her (sit 
down) first with me!” But (the sledge) 
broke down. 
Then the Wolverene said, “Oh, with 
me!” (The sledge) again broke down. 
Then the Hare also said, “Oh, with 
me too!” His sledge was of grass. 
Still, though she sat down upon it with 
a thump, it did not break. 
So he married her. He took her 
home. They came to his mother. The 
mother was staying simply under a 
heap of drifted snow. They had no 
house. “Oh, there! 1 have brought 
a woman.” 
Then the mother began to sing, 
“Strange-ers’ daughte-er simply under   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
tim {me ri¥nut genu'mekeulin, ge'mge- 
nute’kin deund-us-qi'uln, ¥n1, ke'per, 
kein, ilvilu’, pips/lalhm, réqoqa’Thin. 
Meélota'lht namiiila’tinat.  Ni‘'wkwii'n 
®nfiot: “Guq, muri minfieus'qi‘urkin.” 
— “Go, ta'mam. Mi‘tkri o'rgukil-é- 
wm!” — “E, guni, atau” E'nmen 
wa'lomge. 
E'nmen Enqa'n wit pukiTgatt, 
¢nmen quid nilgainewnin, <i¥gd, 
metewnin; Enfa’q ke'perd, ne‘me me- 
tew'nin, Enfi'q riquqe’td, ne'me meteu’- 
nin, Enfa’q pipekilhé qainewnin, me- 
tew'nin. 
Enfa’q milute'ts, ve¥gin rit, eun 
uwirkmin, ottryin ripékagta’nnén. 
E'nmen napénfit&’tya‘n, En'qa'm qat- 
viya'n nite’rmidiiqin, wkwi't Enio’t: 
“Gug, gimrk ya'net nielqiwkwin.” 
faq nr iwkwi's “Gug, giimrk 
ya'net!” Ninemle'qiet. 
Enfa’q ke'perd {'unin, “Guq, gimr'k!” 
Ne'me ninemle‘qaet. Gik, Enfaq tim 
mélotalhin, “Gug, attau’  gmrk.” 
Ve¥gin o'rgoor, ¢nmen waqe's-qétat- 
ye, luii-mle’ta. 
Gu, fa'wniigé. E'nmen fiaunrag- 
tatye, kLa’qai yo'nen. Liakiyi'fki lien: 
nitva’qen ELa’qai, ui'dd aa'raka. “Gik, 
/nmen vai de'us'qt tretyi'n!” 
E'nmen tipaifia’Aifoé* £La’q: 
in faakkaiir’n len: If 
 

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
drift sno-ow!” Oh, the son said, Well, now, let me go on a search” He kicked (with his foot) a hummock : it 
turned into a house. He kicked some small willow-boughs : they turned into a train of sledges. Then he found bushes of black stunted willow, and kicked them, and they turned into a reindeer-herd. He came back to his mother. “Oh, now let us go to our house!” They came to the house. The mother-in-law 
said to the woman, “Enter with your eyes closed!” The woman entered with her eyes closed. . Then the old woman said, “Look up!” She looked up. The inner room was of white skins. 
All kinds of objects (of value) were hanging around in the inner room, — beads, car-rings, bead necklaces. ‘Then she brought forth a child. They went visiting to dispel their loneliness.! They came to the father. Ku'urkil came out, and then he said to his wife, 
“It seems to me that I have seen our daughter.” The wife said, * Where may our daughter have come here from?" He said, “Still I saw her.” The mother came out also, with one sleeve dangling down? They entered the house. Then Kuurkil’s son, the brother of the young woman, came home from a walk in the open. The father said, “Our son-in-law has come here. What shall we give him to cat?” The son said, “All right! Let me go on a search!” He went to an old camping-place, and found there a dead puppy, which   79 
Guq, ekke'ti unin: “Kita'm miéei'vut- 
kua'k!"  Tmkilhin ke'plunin. Eun 
yaraifn. En-qa'm mit-o’mkiqai ke 
plunin, un orguré/léiam. Gug, pe'kar- 
o’'mkoom unin, ¢'un ke'plunin ne'me. 5 
Fun falvilighmn. 
E'nmen Eraqai’étr qatr. “Go mm. 
ra’gtimik.”  Piki'rga®. Nawmata'la- 
qaya iunin, “Yrlka qresqiwkwi” 
Yrlka resqi'wkwi® fie‘us'git. En'qa’m 10 
fwkwit, “Qive’pgit!” Lig. 
  E'nmen nilhigin yoro'¢hm, ime 
r4¥nut geniLin yoro/érku, kilelalhin, 
véloThilhn, kile'l-e¥mghin. 
E'nmen kmie'tyl, e'nmen alaran- 15 
to'rkm, ELIgets gi'ty’t, ¢‘nmen Ku'urkil 
ntolén,  e'nmen fiawane’tr _gi'ulin, 
“Guq mel-ieekik tlu¥a'n.” Ne‘wini 
Yunin, “M&iko li‘miia niye'tin fie‘us™ 
qit?  E'nmen niugin, “E'wkurga 20 
tlu¥s'n”  Eraifm qon-&tirga gan- 
tolen.  Res'qi'wkwa't. 
E'amen Kuurkilin e'kik, yidemit- 
tw'mgin ie’usqitin, notai'pu piikigi'. 
FLg unin, “Intuulpir geen. Reqs 25 
f0'tim raqamr'tva?” — Gu,” i'wkwi, 
“Kita'm mitei/vatkuzk.” 
E'nmen pt'ttiralqa‘fmvét gelatin,   
+ Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 595. 2 An attitude much in use among Chukchee women (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 245; also Plate xxvii, Fig. 3)

----

80 
had died from (having) too many lice. 
It was quite lean. 
When he came back, the father 
asked him, “Well?” And it was only 
a small puppy, exceedingly lean. Oh, 
the father-in-law said, “Hi! the son-in- 
law is hungry, cook some meat for him I” 
They did the cooking, but he could 
not eat anything. He felt too much 
aversion (to eating). 
“Oh!” (exclaimed the Raven,) “how 
very extraordinary! Now, then, let 
me go for a walk myself” He also 
went to an old camping-place of the 
Reindeer people. He found there some 
excrement, simply an outpouring from 
diarrhea, He brought this home. 
“Now, here! this is (at least) more 
slippery (for swallowing).” 
Then the son-in-law became angry, 
and began to chide: “Oh, the deuce! 
What have they brought? How can 
I eat this?” He felt much aversion 
(to it). “We do not feed on such 
things.” 
They went away. The next morning 
the father-in-law went to visit them. 
When he came to them, they were 
about to move camp, and the tents 
were already broken down. The son- 
inlaw said, *Oh, goodness! we are 
going to move! and just at this time 
you come! Up to yesterday you could 
not come!” [Then the son-in-law said,] 
“Well, now, anyway, have a reindeer 
slaughtered for you.” The father-in-law 
said, “Oh, I will slaughter it myself, 
with your leave.” 
He had the reindeer slaughtered 
when they were ready to start. He 
slew a fat (doe whose) fawn (had) died 
(in the spring). The sondn-law said,    
  BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
a'noken vil qai-a¥ttiqai gemimluwi- 
lin Junin, qu'pglin. 
E'nmen pikirgi, mga pmlonén. 
“Amto’? Qauii tm qun, qai-a*tuqai, 
ig-qupqalin. Gik, matalr'yam {'wkwi, 
“G1, guna mtuulpir quwigitkr gitte’u- 
Im” E'nmen uwi-plr'tkui’, go, loi- 
qamr'tvata {tyl®. Nitirmitie'tgin. 
“Go, &tk-alvamvalm. E'nmen, 
Kita'm, mitei'vutkui'k” Neme Eau 
uwa’ralqa‘fmvetr itr. E'nmen ele] 
Iunin, Enqan pé‘rkathm. E'nmen 
nra’gtannén, “Gi, wo'tqan vai {tiéin.” 
Qin've’r ntu'ulpir an‘iénai’piié’, fim- 
wai¢’e®: ‘Migriiie'un ri’nutet nara’ti- 
fionat? Mi‘fikri mmnu“net?” Nitirmi- 
fetgin. Muri Eniii’'n-va'la lefi-qamr't- 
vali-me're.” 
E'nmen ewkwe'tyd't. Guq, rrga’tik 
ttm matalin qatr. Puki'rgi®. 
gitqenat, yarat im  genéi‘meuleet. 
ntu'ulprretd. ‘unin: “Go, tite’fet, mit- 
yalhrirkin.  E¢hmre'win, ethinre’m, 
ye'tyi*?  Aivend-a’p cetkilin’ mtu'ul- 
piretd i‘unin, * A’mEn im, ra’qal, qaa’n- 
mata qi'tyi*” En‘ga’'m gi'ulin matali, 
©Guq, gmna’n &ni't tim qai'vE i'ma.” 
Qaa’nmmén tm muulqatifio’k. E'¢elin 
kuwi”lin ga'nmilén. ntu’ulpiretd i‘'unin, Niyal- 2 0

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
“I will carry it for you” He said, 
“No, I will carry it myself” They 
went away with their (pack-sledges, — a 
whole) train. Still before they vanished 
from sight, (he began to eat). He ate 
the whole day long of that reindeer. 
carcass, and pecked at it. 
After that he passed a night there 
near the carcass. While eating, he 
was also defecating upon the carcass. 
The son came to see him, and looked 
on at his doings. ‘What are you 
doing?” — “Oh, I am tired out! I 
have worked till this moment.” 
“Well, let me bring a sledge!” The 
son departed. (He came home) and 
said to his mother, “Oh, your husband 
has made the whole reindeer-carcass 
into mere excrement.” The mother 
said, “Oh, he will come all alone i. e., 
empty-handed)!” (The Raven's son) 
hauled the sledge, and came (to the 
father). “Oh, you have come? (said 
the Raven) and he had almost con- 
sumed the (whole) carcass. “Where is 
the carcass?” — “There it is!” — “Is 
it?” said the son. 
They went away, and came (to the 
house). “Miti’!” She paid no attention. 
“Oh, I have a slaughtered reindeer I” 
(Still) she paid no attention. “Are you 
not glad?” Then the wife gave utter- 
ance. “For what should I be glad?” — 
“Oh, here is a slaughtered reindeer!” 
— “What reindeer?” — “The fawnless 
doe!” — “But it seems that you have 
brought only the skeleton, mere bones.” 
— “Oh, lok here, come out! It is 
simply white with fat!” But in reality 
it was his excrement, which looked white   81 
“A’men mmnlete’t-hir.” I'wkwi’, “Giim- 
nan nit”  E'mnmen  mu'ulqityat. 
E’thi améda'tya’t, m-lo’iét gagami't- 
valen ai‘'makik, gupi'tkulin. 
E'nmen ki'wkwi® Enki qaa’nmiok. 
Ca'ma len aimakik na'laioqén qa- 
mrtvama. E'kketi pe’glignin, lunin. “Nre'q-i-git?” — “Gu, nénalva’w-&-tim. 
Ne'wik ninemirke’w-i-tim.” 
“A'men tm mo'rguntaa’k’ E- whwe'tyi®. La’ {unin, *AmEn dm Lon wot uwa¥quéiti ai'mak em e“lu getei’- 
  kilin.” Eta’ta i‘unin: “Guq, om lien 
refetyd®”  Guq, ¢'nmen orgunlata’tyé, 
¢nmen pukirgi': “Go, yer” Eun 
gatko'fifiolén dm ai'mak. “E'mr 
ai‘mak ?” “enqa’n dm.” — “Eel” 
(km nini‘ugin). 
Guq, ewkwe'tyd't, pukirgat. “Mi- 
tei’!" Aa'lomkilén. “Go, gaqaa'nme- 
tm.” Aalomkilen. *Akorgautkile- 
git” E'nmen i¢'win walo'mgé. *Ra- 
q¥'tem  mukorga'wkwa'k?® “Go, 
qaa/nmio-m wot.” — “Ra-qaa’nmi?” — 
“KuwéIr-qaa’nmi.” — Ti'wkw'k, em- 
amyi'wkun ridin, ematuim’ — 
“A’nt qunum, qanto®”. Lien élhipé- 
rarkin ¢/ee.” Qiu Ein vl], nitha- 
      
  
+ This is a vocative of Mitt, the name of Raven's wife.

----

82 
upon the carcass. “It seems that it is 
the skeleton covered with excrement.” 
In a moment [from mere confusion] he was dead from mere shame; or, rather, 
he simulated death. His wife carried him 
to the funeral place. She put him into 
an old jawbone house. Then she went 
home. As soon as they went home, he 
also went away. He came to some Rein- 
deer people. He cut off his penis (and 
made it) into a needle-case; his testicles 
(he made) into thimbles, and the hair 
of his pubes into needles. He found 
a husband among the Reindeer people. 
He hung his needle-case with its ap- 
purtenances (up on his sitting-place); 
and when the other (women) came 
near, he would cry out, “(Beware!) 
You will break my needles!” lest they 
should look on them. The needle-case 
was simply his penis. 
At the same time the wife, forsaken 
by him, was crying (in her house). 
A small Fox visited her. (The Fox 
said,) “What is the matter with you?’ 
— “My husband is dead.” — “Well, 
what of that! It seems that he has 
found a husband among the Reindeer 
people.” (The Fox) said, *Make some 
reindeer, — the reindeer of excrement, 
the sledge of excrement. Make this, 
and then go away, [and say thus: 
— Certainly she (i. e., the Raven turned 
into a woman) will come out with one 
sleeve dangling, she likes the new- 
comers much. — So when they say to 
you, ‘Where are you going? you just 
say, ‘Ku'urkil has died. Now I am 
going to make suit to his wife, Ku'ur- 
kil's wife." Then you must say, ‘I am 
going away.’ 
She went away [came home] (and did    
  BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
qin aimakrtkintk. *Ti‘wkwi'k, Enqa’n 
im em-attm-yi‘'wkun alayoi'vilen.” 
E'nmen em-ge'rgi vi®i’, am-iir'rkila. 
Pna’vi’lin qirii. E'nmen fie'wini 
rile’nnin, pettuwalqajo’lik yo'nén, e'n- 
men ra’gtie!, ¢nmen lien’ ya'rau pii- 
ki'rgi't, gantolen. Cautuwa’gt ge- 
wkwe'Lin. Lo'lo &uwi'nin tai‘olhe, trrkit 
ve'lu, élga’rgit titinu.  Qlike'tyi® Eau- 
Zuwa’k. E’nmen tayo’lhit nénaime’qé- 
nat. E'nmen qu'tti Enki &imée’ti. 
Nini'uginet, “Tit't remle’gitki!” i'nqun 
nereluffin.  Tayolhmn tim lolo lien". 
  E'nmen fie'wdn Eni'n pélai'o nité'r- 
gatqén, rikuqe’qaia yo¥nén. *Nre'gd- 
git? — “Uwa¥qué gevivlin.” — * Gu’ 
raqal.  Cautuwa’k, tiwkwi'k, ge'li- 
kerin” T'unin, *Qora’Mr qatei’kigm, 
qaat efle”lin, o'rgoor efle”lin, qgitei’- 
kigm.  Enqa'm  qalqatylh, qi'wkwi® 
En‘fio’t, — miteli’i rantoa® qon-te'tirga, 
gaka‘filiar'nken, — eur neri'wkut, 
“Mike qat’? — Enqa’m qiwkwi, 
‘Ku'urkal gevi¥lm, Enga’n tim Ae'win tiieundu’s'giwkwii'n, Ku'urkilin tm fie’ 
win Enqa’'n ri'wkwid®: ‘gim te 
wkwe'erkm.’” 
  Ewkwe'tyl, ra’gtit?, ne'me riquqe’ti

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
all this). Then again she was found 
by the Fox. (The Fox) said, “Make 
(a likeness of) a man’s head with hair 
upon it, and put it close to yourself 
on the outer side of your pillow. When 
evening comes, put it down there. 
Then in a short time that husband of 
yours, the one you have seen to-day, 
who has come out with one sleeve 
dangling, he will come.” 
When evening came, Kuwurkil felt restless, he grew jealous, then he grew 
mad and wanted to come out. They 
could not keep him back. 
He went out, and went away. He 
came to his wife, and called out, *O 
Miti’!” She paid no attention. “O 
Miti’!” — “Ho!” — “I have revived!” 
— “Oh!” — *With whom are you 
sleeping?” — “A suitor came to me.” 
(Just so she spoke as) she had been 
taught by the Fox. “Oh, I have come 
back, I have revived!” Then the 
woman said, “It seems that I have 
seen you recently. You came out with 
one sleeve dangling.” He died again 
from shame. This time he did it in 
earnest. Verily, he died, was dead 
from shame, simply rolled down. That 
is all. 
“Told by Qo'tirgm, a Maritime Chukchee 83 
lu¥nin, I'wkwi®, “Ora‘wéra-la’ut qitei’- 
kigan, geki'rgitin ¢’nmen £nqa’m ginrk- wo'thm-ta'gnik  qanatta’wkwe gunrk- timla’.  Reulqitvi’d®, Enqa’n qanatia’- 
wkwe, En‘qa’m 1a’n ai‘ek i'gitkin gini'n 
Io¥o, gmi'n uwi¥qué Enqam qon-ie- 
arga gantolén lu¥an, Eaqa’n refetyi®.” 
E'nmen wu'lgitvik Ku'urkil li'iilifis 
na’yo'n, viye'reld, ¢‘nmen yergé ppifioi, enmen ranto’firfioi, aa’lomkElén a’rek. 
Qiinve'r Ato’e%, ewkwe'tyi®, lawané'- 
tr piiki'rgi®, eifie’utkui®, “Mitei I” Aa’ 
lomkElén, “Mite I” “Wui?® — 
“Tein'd’k.” — “Ee!” — “Mefin-tu’ri 
miyrlqén-tw'ri?” — “Mi‘akri fie‘und-uld 
gayoti-gim!” Riquqe'ti geninei'vulin. 
Gug, tyetyi'k, tei'dk.’ E'nmen 
fe'win ww, *Tiwkwi'k dm fan, 
grnmil tiluut. Qon-&&'irga tim frto’e".” 
E'nmen tim em-ge'rgd vii’. Enata’l 20 
im qés'qate’wkwi’, qo'n'pit vii, gee'r- 
guwillin, fen: gawnr'tkolén. Erre?. 
     
man, in the village of Mis'qan, November, 1900. 
15. Lymilin Li'miul (A Story about a Polygamist.) 
Once (there lived) a polygamist. 
He said to his wives, “One (of you) 
have a fur shirt made, and the other 
have some trousers made, and let them 
be all white.” They finished the clothes, 
and all of them went out. The moon 
was on the wane. Then (the polyga- 
1—JESUP NORTH PACIIC EXPED., VOL. VIL. Enmen Imi qla’ul fawand’n 
fwkwi®, *Qutiind rin nitei'knin, quti’- 
ini kona'gté, niteunilhiqinet.” E‘nmen 
miplr'tquqin, fto’a%t krnmal; nérgip- 
yelha'tqén. E'nmen qinur kithinta'tye, 
Ae'wind migite/qin, piTkii®, a'un-gita’gts  

----

84 
mist) ran away. His wives looked on. 
He crouched down and made himself 
flat right before them. Then they 
looked for him, but could not find him. 
They entered the house. He departed 
towards the east [windward], and saw 
a number of kellet. One of them, just 
as he was coming, began to angle for 
fish with a rod. Very soon he pulled 
out a little infant. It was a human 
infant. - He pulled it out. The infant 
cried, “Ada, aia’, afia’ I” 
The man coughed. The ke'le said, 
“Oh, oh, a guest!” — “Yes!” — “Let 
us go home!” — “You go first,” the 
kele said to the man “How can I 
go first? 1 do not know (the way). 
The house-masters (should) go first.” — 
“Oh, oh, all right!” 
The ke'le went first. They came 
to the house. “Go in!” — “We in 
our houses are wont to say to our 
wives, ‘Spread good skins for bedding. 
A guest is here.” 
“Ah, well, all right!” The kele 
entered the house. “Oh, I bring this 
one! Sharpen your butcher-knives!” 
Meanwhile the man fled, running to a 
corner of the house — the one clad 
in white. 
The kele came out, but (the man) 
was not to be seen. He made him- 
self flat there (upon the ground). The 
kele began to chide his wife: “Oh, 
this is bad! We have let our quarry 
go, very good game.” The other one 
again departed. Again he found a 
settlement. This one was of real human 
people. 
One man came out. He stopped 
close by him, but the other one could 
not see him at all. That one passed   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
pilbrrra’tys® qunum.  E‘nmen nilqaie- 
&ki'wkwin, uid, lunlu’ti nrntigin. 
E'nmen  resiqiwkwit, ewkwe'tyi® 
aigepts, ke'le-giniw lu¥ninet, qol tm 
Enrkqat puki’m anéle’k. E'nmen lw'ur 
nananaqa’gétim tiAunin, &wkurga vai ora’wélan fian, ti‘funin qu‘num, nite’r- 
gatqén: Ana’, aia’, afa’” 
  F'nmen taggéngae® qla’ul. Kalaifm 
i'wkwit, “Qa’ko, re'mkilm 1" — 11" — 
© A’men-iim, minra’gtimik.” — “Qéiya’- 
notys,” kele'ti {unin. *Mifkri mm- 
ya'notya'k? gew#tr. Aunralltt gaa’ 
neta” — “Gi, tam, a‘men!” 
Yametys'.  Pukirga't. “Qresqi- 
wkwit.” — “Mergina'n me'rég-ra’k fe 
winti gi'wi: ‘Aikolat qatadnira’ar- 
kinétks, re‘mkilm fot.” 
“1, tam, nire'qin im.”  Resqiwkwi® 
kalaifin.  “Guk, Enga’n fo’tr tma't- 
virkm. Gik! amen pe'kulti qanir- 
gelurkmitki” E'nmen Ro'ent?, ratag- né'tt gakithintaén enqa'n ilhi'ralaqai. 
Nito’e"m kalai’iimn, ¢'un ui’fid, fio’onkr 
gaprlhirra’sén.  E'nmen fawane’tr ma- 
rautttnoé kalai'fim.  “Guk, wnmuit 
a'mm  eun, gmnik mitmletrie’tyd'n, 
mite’-gmni’k.”  E'nmen ne'me ewkwe'- 
n'mnim ne’me lu*nin, £n-fata’l im 
lu-ora’wéran. 
  Qla'ul im gantolen. Enrkqaé nit- vétta'qén va'névan milurkinin. En-qa’m “Yi¥lhin tm kuw- 
   

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 85 
water, and then said, “The moon is 
on the wane.” The guest then said, 
“It is quite true.” — “Oh, oh, a guest?” 
— “Yes!” — “Indeed, you are human?" 
— “Oh, yes! Rather it is you who 
are not human. You are the kellet.” 
— “In truth, we are not” — “Oh, 
then let us enter the house!” 
“But we have neighbors who indeed 
are keflet, and these ke'let will fetch 
you to their own house.” They entered 
the sleeping-room. Before they had 
time to eat, a kele-woman entered. 
“Oh, 1 have come to fetch you! You 
must marry me.” He went out. She 
took him to her home. On the sides 
of the entrance a brown bear and a 
polar bear were tied up. Before they 
could enter, the monsters rushed at 
the man. The kelle-woman said to 
them, “Aha! it is the master.” 
They lay down and copulated. All 
at once an old woman appeared from 
the rear wall. She carried a butcher- 
knife. This was the mother of the ke'le- 
woman. This old woman approached 
the man, carrying the butcher-knife. 
She wanted to strike him on the 
head. He simulated sleep. Still she 
proved to be quite nimble, and fled 
again. He (simulated awakening), and 
said to the kele-woman, “Oh, I had 
a dream! Such an old woman (it was), 
who nearly killed me!” The woman 
said, “Oh, oh! again, again! What 
are you doing? I want to have this 
one for a husband.” 
They slept again. The ke'l-woman 
slept quite soundly. Then the man 
laid her down and exchanged clothes 
with her. The woman's combination- 
suit he used for a covering for himself,   Incerkin Enqa’m re'mhalin i'wkwit: 
“A'men om ya‘rat” — “Ga, qa'ko, r/min? — iff — “Qai've, lu- ora'wéraigit? — ‘1! Viqqal tm 
qunum tu'ri qar&/mena-te'ré, kele-tu’ri?” 5 
— “Gu'ni, qart'ména-me’re.” — <Guk, munre’s-qiumik.” 
“E'wkurga-m10'n maa’le mutilhr'r- 
kin kele qai've. E'ur fan naragun'- fou” E'nmen rlhi%t. Ehi qamit- vaiifioa’t, lu'ur kala'-fiaus'qa’tirfi res'- qiwkwi. “E, tigrgt, qenamata’ss” E'nmen ito’. Rira’gtannén. E'nmen un yaragtruk kefam, qol omka gewku'zinet. E'¢hi rasqéunio’a’t, Sit nepimrkin Enqa'n qla‘ulgai.  Kala- flaus'qa’tiiia {uninet: “Ga, ga, ga, 
&tn, &tn.” 0 
5 
E'nmen atéa'tya't, quimus’t. Lu‘ur 
im mpiiawqa’géinm kinmai’pi ewer 20 
vii*, pako'litfin nine’nfagin, qaLii En- 
qa'n fiaus'qa’térfinén ea’. E'nmen Et 
qla’vlqai yo¥rkimen, pekul rrnti. 
Cit lew gatha’pirkinen, pra’ reti- 
128%, ¢nmen nryquqin, geginteulin. 25 
Ne'us'qit ‘unin: “Gu, trétla’a’k. Raq 
mpifiawqa’gérin  kime'k enanmie?” 
E'nmen &ufio’®® he’us'qit, “Ga, ga, ga, 
ne’'me, ne‘me, ne'me re'qirkm? Eun 
wo'tqan uwi¥quéu tihrrkin.” 30 
Yilqi'tya*t ne'me. E'nmen tim ka'la- 
fausqa'téian  geilgiruCeulin, enmen 
qla’ulqaa rattav'nén, pu'ru kele-fe’us- 
qitin kerkér ini'rginu I'gnin, pura 
qla’ulqaién {rn kelleneusqitik inir- 35

----

86 
and his own fur shirt he put on her 
as a covering. Then he slept again, simulated sleep. He had a knife ready. The old woman appeared again from 
the rear wall, and all at once she rushed 
on her daughter and struck her, sleeping, 
(with such force) that the head was 
cut off. 
Just then the man struck the old 
woman with his knife, and also cut 
off her head. He put on his clothes, 
and then went out, carrying both heads 
with him. These he threw down to 
the bears. They pounced upon them. 
At that moment he went out. He 
came to his recent host. “Oh, you 
have come!” — “Yes.” Then the old 
man called out, “Oh, oh, oh! from 
this time the people shall go around 
in a different manner” Then he de- 
parted, and on the way died of old 
age. That is all. 
Told by Qo'tirgm, a Maritime Chukchee 
16. (The Woman who marri 
There was a house. A woman of 
the human people (who lived in it) 
was deserted by her husband. She 
was starving, and (at last) was crawling 
on allfours from mere starvation. She 
was very hungry. Then she saw a 
house, entered it, and looked around. 
Ready-made clothes were hanging there. 
A dish was filled with tallow. She ate 
of it. As soon as she finished, she 
fled to the open country. 
A man came (who was in the open), walking on foot. It was the (Man in) 
the Moon. “Oh, how very extraor- 
dinary! Who was that who came BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
gu yipa'nnén.  E'nmen  geillqivin 
gapuailqaién qla'ulqai  valar'nia. 
Ne/me ure’wkwi® nprie‘ wai kinmai'pt, 
Iw'ur fiaakkryam gi‘inu IYgnin, yrlqiln 
tim krplinén, le‘ut ¢nmen Euwi'rkinin. 
Qla’ulqaia inprie’wqii vala'ta pur 
ga'rkiplilen, un gelew'tilvilin. xn'ga’'m ani kergupgd, len Enga'n leutti fitou’ts  r'nfninet, En'qa’'m omka’gtr 
rntininet, nepiri Eity4’n, Enqatkina’ta 
fto’e.  Gumilking'ti aunra’lét qaty. 
“Gug, a'men len yeu?” — “Gk, 11” 
Enqa’'m mpmaryim neife’tqin, “Go, 
go, go. Em clvula’q re'mkn ralai’ vitifiot.” E'nmen ewkwe'tyi®, tila’nvu 
pelkuviit. Erret. 
  man, in the village of Mr'sqan, November, 1g0o. 
ied the Moon and the Kelle) 
E'nmen qol yara’chm, nc'us'qat dm 
qol ora’wéra-fia’us'qat uwa¥quéiti E'nku 
ge'ttilin, enmen gequpqaLin, elveti- 
fie'ti genelin em-qupqiti. E'nmen 
gite’. Qan've'r tm yara'éhm lu¥nin, 
res-qiwkwi®, &ite'pgl!, eur teik-evirm 
gaiméi'vilén, eur tpalha kemedr 
geyrreyin, mqamrtvaqén tm e’nmen, 
lien: miplr'tkugin, nigiteu’qin nota’gtr. 
  Qla’ul pitki‘rgi® Zeivutku’lm. Yi¥lhin 
tim qu’num, ri’nut. “Gug, &k-a’lvam- 
va'ln, rd¥nut lei'vurkin qamitvala‘ar- 
kin, uwkkdm-yrriic telprrkin.” Ne'me     5 
0 
5

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
around and ate the tallow? The whole 
dishful is gone.” The next morning he 
went away again. He changed his 
boots and put on other ones. Still 
no wife was to be seen. As soon as 
he went away, the woman came, and 
again found the tallow. She ate abun- 
dantly of it, and felt much better. 
The man came home. “Oh, it is 
bad! How very extraordinary! Who 
is it that (steals) so much food? Well, 
now, let me stay at home (literally, 
‘let me be not walking’) to-morrow 
morning!” Noon-time came. Then the 
woman appeared again. She entered 
the house and made for the food. 
Before she had time to begin eating, 
he caught her. 
“Ah, ah, ah! Don't! Off!" She 
struggled. “Oh, then it is you!” — 
“Off, off! Let me go!" — “Be quiet! 
I shall not harm you. 1 want to question 
you. Oh, why are you wandering 
about? You have a master?” — “I 
have not.” — “How is it?” — “I have 
been deserted by my husband, cast off 
and starved” — “Have you seen 
nothing here in the house * — Nothing 
at all.” — “Oh, then I will marry you!” 
He married her. Again he went 
away. In the evening he came back. 
He said to his wife, “Do not come 
out from the inner room. Let us enter 
(both), (and then) simply throw my 
boots out to the outer tent.” 
She threw the boots outside. Im- 
mediately after that the dish appeared, 
quite by itself, filled with cooked meat. 
They ate, and then they put the dish 
outside. They awoke in the morning. 
The woman looked towards the dish. 
It was (clean and) in (good) order.   87 
irga'tik ewkwe'tyi®. Elvellin len: ple'kit 
nénai’piiqénat, na‘qam eu'rreklin he’ 
win. Ne'me qitr, e’ur Enga'n fie’us'- 
qt pikirgi®, tpalhin ne'me luni 
Qamitvala'tyé¥, qinve’r ginke'wkwit. 
  Qlaul tm ne'me ra’gné®.  “Gug, wnmui a'nt. Celea'lvam-va'lin. Ra¥nut on qamitvala‘arkin? Kita'm eur irga'tik edei’vutkuki mi'tyd'k” Ne‘me am-giotilo’ nelyf. Luar ne'me fio'tr 10 ye'ty, res-qi'wkwit im ne'me, také- hen qati. Ne'me echi &it qami'tvar- Jan, Iw'ur pirinin. 
“Akakaka’! ilu'kd, a'lva,” niqama’g- 
ragén. “Gu, €'uian gma’n.” — “Gu'ng, 15 
a'lva, qinerrilhi®!” — “Gu'ni, ilukd. 
Qar¢m  minre/qewkur, mimitlo’ur. 
Gik, iam nilei'vutkuigir?  Qai'vé 
get'nvegir? — “Ufa” — “E'mim? 
2 «Uwa¥quéits ¥nku gine'téiin, ge. 20 
nantaatvaulén, ginenqu'penlin? — 
“Enqa’m vamévan wu'tku yaradiku 
re‘qin qinelu?rkin?® — “Va'névan.” — 
“Guq, a’'mén Gm, mimata’git.” 
Ma'tanén. Ne'me Cei'vutkui®. Wul- 
qitvik tim paki. U'wkwi® Eniot Aa- 
wané’ts, “Enie’ a’ntoka ralkotikoi'pi. 
Minre’s'quumik, li'en* Eot-tagne’tr ple’krt 
qéni'nudimet.” 25 
E'nmen rintminet. E'nmen ln'ur 
vai keme'fs, em-keme'fi resqi‘wkwit, 
Cun ereti geyrrerin. Qamrtvaa't, 
ne’me lien ne'nvui'n keme'sr, rrga’tik 
tim kiye'wkwa't. E’un kemea gite'nin 
fie'us'qiitd, genu'mkeulin. 30 
35

----

88 
He went again, and killed a wild 
reindeer. “Oh, to-morrow we will 
arrange a thanksgiving feast! Do not 
carry the charmstrings yourself.” Then 
they came to the wild reindeer prepared 
for the feast, and the charm-strings 
were there. 
Oh, they slept! They awoke in the 
morning, and he departed again. (She 
asked herself,) “For what reason did 
he say to me, ‘Leave that trunk there 
unopened! Do not pry into (its con- 
tents). Do obey this (order of mine)'?” 
Oh, as soon as he went away, she 
opened the trunk. Another woman 
was sitting there: the two halves of 
her face were of different forms. One 
half was black, the other half was red. 
The new-comer made a sound with 
her tongue: “Pri” 
The other one looked up, and all 
of a sudden died and fell down. The 
new-comer closed the trunk, because 
she felt great fear, [of course]. The 
husband came home. They entered 
the house. She told him nothing, be- 
cause she feared his (anger). She 
threw the boots out to the outer tent, 
but they waited vainly for the dish. 
Then the husband thrust (his head) 
out from under (the cover of the sleep- 
ing-room). “Oh, oh! How extraor- 
dinary! Where is she? (You are) 
sure that you have not opened the 
trunk?” — “I have not!” — “Then 
where is she? Listen (to reason), and 
tell (the truth)!” Then she said, “I 
looked on her. She would not look 
on me. Then I made a creaking sound 
with my mouth. And she fell down.” 
«Oh, how very strange you are! 
Why could you not obey? Not without   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Ne'me &ei'vutkui®. Gelvulin, — *Gik 
irga’uk Um mininetémik, Tai ftkwut 
enfie’ gman ennc’kd gintgmet.” 
E'un nayopa'tya'n éna'téryo vil, e'un 
taifikwut gene'Linet. 
Guq, ylqi'tyd't. 1rga’uk om kiye’- 
wkwi't, ne’me Eei'vutkurkm. *Reqim 
a‘mén i‘unin, ‘No‘onqan &e'ul endie’ 
enve'ntetki gantrkin.  En‘iie’ pegériiu 
elhki.  Ahmi quwalo'mirkin dm 
ven’? 
Gik, ¢'nmen Zei'vutkui, etl ruwen- 
tefewi'nin. Eun Eki feusqa't 
nénanva'tqén, e'nmen lu¥lqil dria‘ta 
va'lin, qata’ken le¥qat nu'ugin, qol 
4m mi&ogén le¥qal. E'nmen fie'us- 
qiit yikr'rga puke’nnin: “Pr!” 
E'nmen  gite'nin, e’ur fan vai vi'T, 
pekagta’tyt®. E'nmen rménnoma’nneén, 
miikri nayilhau'qen, qailo’qim.  Pu- 
kitgi'm uwi’qut.  Resqiwkwi't. 
Va'névan nr'tvinén, ¢nmeé tm nayil- 
hawnén. Ple’kit ri'ntminet Zot-taghé'ts, 
¢nmen a'téak lowa'wkwa't kama'gtr. 
  Guq, uwi¥qué ure'wkwi': “Gug, qako. Tite'het-verm. Enfa’q emi? 
Qai've ete teil inenventetkligit?" 
Z ‘Efe’ — ‘Na‘gam um emi? 
Gund quwalo/mirkm, qatvugun!® 
Qiin've'r tw'wnen : *Emite’tim tigite’a'n. 3 Inegite’kilin, ete. Yikirga tipuket- 
yak, lu'ur kapléta'tye®.” 
“Guq, céq-alvam-va'l-é-git. la'm age 
ro/lkil-e-git.  Atta’um un uwi¥quéits

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
reason, then, were you deserted by 
your husband. Give me my drum!” 
He drummed on’it, and the other 
woman revived, Only she was quite 
angry, and shoved in the dish (with 
all her might). 
The next morning they awoke, and 
he sent (the woman) back. He said, 
“Not without reason were you deserted 
by your husband. You have a home, 
let me convey you there” He con- 
veyed her to her father, took her there, 
and said to his father-in-law, “Oh, but 
1 cannot keep watch of her!” 
They wanted to marry her to an 
(earthly) man. But she refused. Then 
the father said, “Whom will you marry, 
a kele will you marry? On the next 
day, when she was (walking) in the 
(open) land, a man came to her. He 
said to her, “There, let us go home!” 
— “I do not want that!” — “Your 
father has invited me to marry you.” 
He took her to his home. The home 
was of stone. There were worms in it. 
This man was feeding on worms. The woman felt disgusted. “Why 
do you not eat?” — “We do not feed 
on such things!” — On what, then, 
do you feed” — “We feed on meat.” — 
“Oh, well! T will go and procure meat.” 
He killed a mouse. “Why do you 
not eat?” — “We do not feed on such 
things.” — “On what, then, do you 
feed?” — “We feed on seal.” — “Oh, 
well! I will bring that.” He brought 
a sea-worm. 
“Why do you not eat?” — “How 
can 1 eat a worm? It is disgusting.” 
— “What, then, do you feed on?” 
“We feed on meat of the wild rei 
deer.” He brought a marmot. “Why 
    89 
Fuku ge'tigit. Ya'rar rai qinefilhit” E'nmen rnirgirgen’nin. E'nmen ei'u eorga’m Iwur gagtaninai‘pilen, ke- meu gereli'sqicerin. 
  rrga’uk im laye'wkwa't, rlerkmin, 5 
Tunin: “Attaum uwi“quéita wnku ge'tiigit. Opo'pe garai-grt, mnle'git.” Et neni, rpkire'nnin, mata'lin Tunin: “Gu, a'mén tm gimna'n tk guiruk tilva'wkwa'n.” 10 
  Orawer#'tr raléka‘uionen, nrnkéitqin. 
Lu‘ur unin: “Re¥qik tm qliketyi, 
kellek dm qaliket” Qole"ta'lo’ nu- 
te'geik qla’ula yonén. T'unin: “Taga'm, mmnra’gumik” — “Tmkie'rkin” — 15 
“enrgi gomoka'gtt nelike'wkut” Ri 
ra/gtannén.  E'nmen wu'kwulhm ya- 
ra'fit, ¢'nmen kr'milhin, kima’ nitei‘fet- 
qin Enqga’n ora’wéran.   
  
Ne'win niyigithe'tqin. “lam aqamr't- 20 
vaka va'rkin® — “Mu'ri ce Ednin- 
va'la aqamr'tvakale-me'ré.” — “Re’qim 
miqami'tva-toré? —* Teki'eha.” — “Ee, 
tam!  Mitakethinta'ak.”  Pipe'kilhin 
néna‘nmiqen. “Re'qirkin aqamr'tvaka?” 
— “Muri ete Enin-va'la aqamr'tva- 
kile-mo’re.” — “Re‘qim niqamr'tva- 
tore.” — *Mé'mila.’— “E, tam, mina’g- 
tatya'n.” Afiqa’kimrlhin re‘nnin. 
      kin aqamrtvaka?® — © 
kei kimrlhin minus'n? Yegirirgn 
       — “Re‘qam nitei‘fet-tu'ri?” — *Elve 
tli niteifen-mu’ri”  Yileil rennin. 
“Reqirkin  aqamr'tvaka? — “E'te

----

90 
do you not eat?” — “We do not feed 
on such things. Why, it stinks of 
marmot!” — “What, then, do you 
feed on?” — “We feed on walrus. 
blubber.” — “Oh, well! 1 will bring 
that.” 
He brought one from the sea, a 
stranded carcass. Of this she ate. 
“Oh, what do you wish for now?” — 
“For a root of Polygonum Polymor- 
phum out of the ground” — “Oh, 
well! T will bring it.” This time he 
brought a lady-bug. “We do not feed 
on such things. They are disgusting. 
How can I eat it?” — “Oh, well! 1 
will bring another one.” 
Very soon she brought forth a child. 
He brought a human body (for food), and it was her brother's. Next morning she 
was crying near the corner of | her house. 
Then a small Fox visited her. “Oh, 
you! what is the matter with you?” — 
“It is bad! I have been married to 
a kelle. My father gave me toa ke'le.” 
“Oh, make [those — what is their 
name? Make] some ornamented boots. 
And when he would come back from 
somewhere, [when he would come back 
from the open land], you must not 
give them to him (with your hand) 
{from hand to hand]. Just throw them 
down (before him). Let him examine 
them. Then the thread of a spider 
web will descend.” 
Indeed, he came from the (open) 
country. “Why are you crying? — 
“It is only because of some birds (of 
passage) that came from my country, 
that I am crying. — There, change 
your boots!” He took them. When 
he was examining the ornaments, the 
‘woman tried to speak to him, but he   'BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
muri Eovdinva'la aqamrtvakile-me're. Miike miyela‘tkéqén” — *Reqim nitei'fet-tu’ri?’ — “Kopa’lha.” — “E 
tam, mrgtiin.” 
Afiga’kén nekaifim rennin, nomi 5 
rym. enfatal Enqa'n rnin. “E, 
ri¥nut tegge’au Ifirkm?” — “Nute's 
qikin mmrghin — “E tam, mrg- 
  td” Enfa’q gitokal&'qai re/nnin. 
“Eve muTi Enii'n-vala aqamritva- 10 
kile-me’ré. Yeégririrqm. Mi‘iikri mm- 
nd.” — “E tam elve’lin mma’g- 
tatya'n.” 
Pee kmifie'tyi®. Ora’wépen aima- 
kryhin rennin, qauii y¢amétte'mgr- 15 
hm. E'nmen irga‘tik rata’gmik nitér- gatqén. E'nmen’ rikuqe/qiii yo¥nen. “Na'ul, nre'gi-git” — “EViqi, kele'ti genamata’lén. ELga kala’gt gine'itin.” 
“E, ni'rkefut qitei’kigin. Kelliyegit 
qiteikigmet.  Enqa'm  m&nko re’ 
pkirgd, notai'pt repkirgi’, en‘iie’ min- 
ge'pi eilkd. Rrnti qintrgmet. Ena’n 
ur, rentiéen funinet. En‘qa’m ku'rgr- 
fi'Thin rete’gretyat”    
Qailhma’ngét notai'pt puki'rs. “lam nitérga’tte’re? — ¢Atau’ mu'rig-nute’- kinet ga'lhat té'rgo nineThrtm. — Vai qapla’gné®!” Eiminninet. E'nmen un gekeligitelinet plektt, Ac'wind 30 ruwéthawa'nnén, ¢‘nmen lufi-valo'malmn.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
did not hear. Then she went out. 
Just then she saw the thread of a 
Spider-web hanging down. 
Then she was hauled up. Her hus- 
band gave pursuit. She was taken to 
the (house of) Small-Spider (-Woman). 
And just then he also came. “Oh, 
where is my wife?” — * Which wife?” — 
“Again you have made me an object 
of ridicule.” “Oh, but she has 
passed by to the Upper People.” 
He ascended upward, and came to 
the Upper People. That woman came 
to the Polar Star (literally, “motion- 
less star’). “Oh, a pursuer is over- 
taking me!” — “Oh, then, what is the 
matter with you?” — My father gave 
me to a kele” — Oh, welll stay 
here, 1 will conceal you." There was 
a ray of light of elongated shape, like 
a funnel? He put her there. Just 
then her husband came, quite tired. 
“Oh, where is my wife?” The Zenith 
said, “She is here. Take her out your- 
self.” — “Oh, give her to me!” — “I 
will not give her to you. Take her 
out yourself.” — “And where is she?” — 
“She entered [into] this ray of light.” 
And (the ray) was quite long. 
Then he began to ascend. Before 
he reached the middle, he slid (down), 
so that even the nails of his fingers 
were covered with blood. “Oh, give 
me my wife!” — “Indeed, I will not 
[give her to youl. It is too bad. I 
have been given by her (people) fine 
dishes (with food)” And (he spoke) 91 
E'nmen  fiito’d. Luur ku'rgu-iiThin 
enqa’m ilhiqa’tdn Tu¥nin. 
E'nmen  geti'fiulin. ~~ Geelerkle'lin 
uwa¥qué.  Kurgaqaitk  genipkiretin. 
Lu’ur vai pitki'rgi®. “Guq, ne'win e'mi?” 
“Ra¥-fie’'wiin “Gma’n tim 
ne‘me leule’'wu ine'lhi®.” — “E, 
qan fian Grrgo'r-Ramke'tr gaalalén.” 
E'nmen ant gette’sin. Girgo’r-Ram- ke'u piki'rgi®. Enqa’n Ac'us-qit lukal- Eienk gepkitin. “Guq, velerkileli 2naio¥e” — “Go, Imia re'qali-gn?” — “Ewrga gineitin kalagti” — “Go, gu'nii, wu/'tku qatva’e". Mmatésaa't-hir.” 
E'nmen  kaméotryam éulétélvalin, qanu’r koivrlqan, Enke@iku yo'nen. Lu'ur vai uwa¥qué pefiiwe’tlm piki'rgit. 
“Gug, fewin mi? Am-Gmo'n- 
Kano'ta ‘unin: *Wu'tku va'rkin. Gina’ 
&ni't qagto’gin.” — “Amen qine’ilhit.” 
— “Qarém miilhit. Gan init qag- 
to'gm.” — “Miakum va'rkin? 
“Keméu'tiku vai gere’s'qiulin.” E'nmen niuligin. 
E'nmen a'nt getetvidizin. E'¢hi em. 
gmu'n ninelqin, nrallegén, qinve'r 
vegt  mrngkén  gamorétifollaat. 
“Guq_qineilhim fe‘win.” — “Qar¢'m 
mig, guna E*tgin gumoka'gtr 
kemet nite’figinet nril-i-am.” Qari     
  } Compare Vol. VIL, p. 307. * Koivi'lgan means literally *glacier-to from the hills having some ice in the valley 
  small fanael of the Russian samovar (tea-urn), which is Glaciers of the country are usually small, every river coming. which it rises. The funnel in question is probably ooly the also called koivrlqaa. It is often made of bright copper. Perhaps the lustre of the copper called to mind the heen on ice. 1 got this explanation from the Chukehee, though T do ot consider it very plausible. 
13JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., OL. VILL

----

92 
simply of sacrifices. “It is too bad. 
Her parents have (indeed) fine dishes.” “Let me give you a spell” — “Oh, I do not want it.” — “Then take also 
my house of stone.” — “I do not want 
that, cither. This house of mine is 
also hardly accessible to the winds. 
This house of mine is also a good one. 
The wind blows (only in regions) lower 
than (where) I (live). Nevertheless 
dishes of everybody reach here (all 
right). 1 am [also] greater than you.” 
“Oh, give me my wife! [Then also] 
1 will give you the Game Substance.” 
The Zenith said, “I also am (a pos- 
sessor of) the Game-Substance. 1 dis- 
tribute it among the Lower People. 
To the (possessors of) good dishes I give wolverene. To the (possessors 
of) bad dishes I give fox, and polar fox to those (whose) dishes (were) sniffed 
(at by) dogs. To those (whose) dishes 
(were) not sniffed (at by) dogs I give 
wolverene. Also to the (possessors 
of) good dishes I give wild reindeer.”! 
“Indeed, give me my wife! Then 
will I also give you an incantation of 
(noiselessly) creeping (toward) man.” — 
“Oh, but why should I desire to kill 
man, who is protected in life by me.” 
— “Oh, indeed, give me my wife!” — 
“Oh, I will not give her to you. You 
ask in vain. 1 also do not (find) it 
impossible to kill any game whatsoever.” 
“You are so greedy! Why should 
you kill all the game? What are you doing it for? 1 will put you into a 
trunk. You scoundrel! You make 
every kind of game your quarry. I 
always look to (the wants of) the Lower   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
taarowkwa'irgin. 
kemelit.” 
“man ui'wel mi “A’mEn 
tm ra‘qalqal I” — “UL yara’fir giim- 
nin qamata’gin wu'kwén.” — “A’men 5 
im ra‘qalgall Ymi wo'tqan gimni'n 
yara'it ne‘miqdi yo'a a'qa’-ras'qeuii- 
vain. A’men Gm gimnin ne’miqdi 
yara'it nite’figin. Gi'muk yo'o dm am- 
uta nita’qén.  Ge'mge-ni’kin keme'ar 10 
nu‘pkirqin  na‘qam. Ne‘miqai gdm 
ginrk mai‘efiku-wa'l-é-im.” 
Guq, a'men tm qinefilhit ae’win. Uri Gunékwa'rgin mihi.”  Am- 
Gmno'n-Kano'ta niniugin, *Nemiqai 15 
giim Gnnékwairg-&-tm. Iu'ter-Re/mkik 
néna'lpinf-&-tm.  Tai-qamaanvé’nn qe’ 
per ninefilitm.  A¥qakamaanve't 
rékoga’lhin nine’ili-tm, &lhar, a%t- 
yho-kamaanvé'tr.  Aifio’ké-kamaanvé’t 
qe’per nineili-im. Eur taikamaan- 
ve'tr tlvilu’ nine/ili-gm.” “E¥tqi EL'gIt teil: 
  “Gund, qai've-m qine/ilhi® fie‘win. 
Ui oraweré'ti tamitatkowga'n mil 
bir” — “A’men Gm iam Gm giimna'n 25 
ora'wétan mirra‘nmiifa‘n?  E'nmen 
gimnin tan-yagtathio” — “Gund, qai've qinefilhi* Be'win” — “Gu'nd, 
qart'm miilhit. Atay’ Wen: re'qarkia. 
Giimna’n 1mo’-gmne’k ne’me énalwau’- 30 
kel-&-tm.” 
«Gélewkurg-é-git. Ia'm gemge’-gmn- 
ni'k qa'nmua’n? Ra’qiioé*? Cenle/étku 
trayo'ut.  Merkitrgigi.  Gemge 
gnni’k  gmniku qaio¥un.  Gumna'n 35 
Iu'ter-Re’mkan 1m-géta'ta  nine/nti-im.   
+ Some of these details seem to be misplaced. They break the course of the narrative, and later on they. are repeated.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
People. 1 bring back to life those 
wronged by the ke'let.” 
“Indeed, give me my wife! Then 
also will I give you the means of 
walking around in secret” — “There, 
I do not want it. You may walk in 
secret. 1 know you well. Not even 
a single hair (sent by you) would reach 
me here.” — “Then I will also give 
you the incantation for making one 
lame”! — “No, you are only the 
cause of my anxiety. So the incanta- 
tion for making people lame is of your 
making. And probably also it is you 
who cause the vomiting of blood.” 
“Oh, indeed, give me my wife!” — 
“Oh, I will not!” — *I also am (capable) 
of stealing men.” — *You also steal 
men. Therefore (their) promised gifts 
do not come to me. You are simply 
a source of anxiety to me.” 
“Then will I also give you an incan- 
tation for weakening (people).” — “But 
to what purpose shall I use it? Evidently 
it is you who lie in ambush (trying to 
kill) every (living) thing. From this 
time on I shall know you. You are 
only a source of suffering for other 
people, a source of anguish to them.” 
“Oh, give me my wife!” — “Oh, 
I will not give her to you. Get her 
out yourself.” — “Then I will also 
give you the whale incantation.” 
“I am not in need of hunting animals. 
1 myself give food also to the whale.” 
«Oh, give me my wife! 1 will give 
you [this one, what is its name?] 
epilepsy.” — “But, surely, I have no 
desire for this thing. You are an ob- 
ject to be shunned by other people.   93 
Kele'ti rmeka‘wgo ninetenyegte'eh-i- 
tim.” 
“Qai've qineilhi' ne'wan.  Urii 
gimna'n attata lef'wukin miilhir. 
“Gund, ra‘qalqal. Atta'ta qalei‘wuit. 
Gimna'n tai Iré ninelhi-tim tur. Ym 
foufiouliim ene wu'tku epkiklin 
givmuk.” — <ULii efiu'tin miilhie” — “E'te. Gifmik len’ afiaérrg-t-git. Ui fan gini’n ritomga’wgo e'iu'tin,  Eufia’n 
gina’n inenmuvigrele’tigi.”   
  «Gu'nd, qai've qine’ilhit fie‘win.” — 
“Gund, qar¢m.” — “Ne'miqai gin 
na’n tule’ti ninentrim ora’wétat” 
‘engan gman wets nincnugit Ce/mit gimuk éna'tvat epki'rkd nitva’- 
qén. Lien’ gi'muk afia‘éirg-e-git.” 
“Utii ténanetiai’ &wgan miilhit.” — 
“Giimna’n tim vai re’qu traya’aa'n? 
Foviata’l im i'ppe gina'n ime ri¥nut 
em-gnii'ti ninentrgit. Enfata’l dm 
Wi tihigr. Lien tumu’g tawémen- 
irwg-e-gu, gilo'urg-.gir.” 
“Gun, qine’ilhi* fie‘win I" — “Gund, qart'm millhr. Gina'n Sint qagto'gn.” “Utii rafwwgan milk” “Qarémenai’gim ginoi-r'tulilqal--im. Giimna'n im ninenteifiete’w-i-im re‘w.”     
    “Gund qineilhi*m fe'wan. man 
ni'rkifut miilhir, man ite’yun miilhr.” 
— “A'men tm gimna'n uk Enqga’n 
teggehu luli. Lien tumuk 
korgu'urg-é-git. Gm gi'wi Enfo’t: 
  
* Compare Vol. VIL p. 470.

----

94 
1 was saying, ‘Oh, my! what being acts like this? And it is you” — 
“Oh, give me my wife!” 
Then at last the Creator! said to 
his wife, “Open the trunk!” He said, 
“Gracious! you are truly a murderer 
of men. Why (in truth) are you living? Look here! I am really a god? Look 
here! I will put you in.” 
Then he put him in. And the sky 
was obscured. It grew dark. No light 
was left. (The Zenith) asked him, 
“Well, now, are you still so (importu- 
nate) as before?” Then (the ke'lz) spoke quite low: 
“Really, you are killing me.” — Well, 
now, I tell you once more, ‘T am keeping 
watch onthe Lower People. Well, 
now, are you still as importunate as 
before?” — “Oh, truly, (no) I am even 
defecating into my own trousers.” 
The Polar Star spoke to his wife, 
(and then said) “Open (the trunk) a 
little” She opened (it), and it grew 
somewhat brighter. Well, then, are 
you still as importunate as before?” — 
“Indeed, give me my wife!” He said 
again to his wife, “Close the trunk.” 
Thena tempest of snow came. [Even] 
the sky was full of whirling snow.  (Cre- ator) asked (the ke'ls) again, “Well, now, will you disown me still? — “Oh, not from this time. It is bad. 1 am cold” And he trembled from cold. Well, now! How are you now” — “You kill me altogether.” Again he said to his wife, “Open the trunk a little” The storm subsided again. (The weather) cleared. 
“Well, now, you disown me still?   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
‘Gu, titefiet_fiot, ra*va'irga Enfin® 
trkinin?  E'ufian gina’n.” — *Gu'nd 
qine’ilhi® fie’wiin I” 
Qin've’r fie'wdn {unin Ténante'm- 
guia, “Cea ganve'ntetyi’.” I'unin, 5 
“Ina’ngen tm, yiqqii ora’wéLa-taifiatié- 
ha'tlégn? Meiko requ iuleerkin? 
A’miqun, i’ppequn tm vai va'irgé-tm. 
A’miqun dm, kita'm minyo'wkut.” 
E'nmen yo'nén. E’nmen vai y&'ehin 10 
nimfirtd'tyi’, wusquimétkura, ui'ia aké’- 
rka nelly’. Nena‘milogen, “Amto’, 
pa‘néna raraqitha’arkin?” 
E'nmen me’rinfe gawethau'fiolen, 
“Gund, vai, enmen éna'nmirkin.” — 15 
“Amto’, de'wik tiurkindgr, ‘Gim- na'n iu'ter-re'mkin am-gint¢'ta nine’nt- tim.’ Amto’, pa’néna raraqiha’tirkin ” 
— “Guq, guns, ¢'nmeé qui'mik ta'la’- forkin.” 
Tlukal- Esie’r geae'w gi'ulin, “Ki'tkit 
qanve/ntety”” — Ruwente'nnin. E'n- 
men vai yd'tvue® &mquk. 
pa'néna raraqitha’tyes” 
fie'wiin qine’ilhi” Ne'me ic'wi'n 
“Qannimatym gf.” “Amto’, 
    E'nmen a’ligtr'ygithun piki'rgi. 
pet tm vai y¥éthin ga'ligiygiroién. 
E'un nénaminlo’qén, “Amto’, pa'néna 
qra‘qu rineThii®?” — “Gu, qaré'm i'git. 
E¥tqi tiqéwgadino’a’k.” E'nmen gawé. 
wraliiiolén,  “Amto’, mifike/mil igit?” — “Ya“rat tm éna’nmirkin”  Ne‘me fie'wan unin, “Ce'ml ki'tkit qanven- 
tetyi®” Ne‘me uifia kirygin nelyit. Mele'tyit. 
“Amto’, pa'néna qra'qu rinelhii®?   
+ For the identity of the Polar Str, Dawn, Zenith, Creator, etc, compare. Vol. VII, p. 314. # Literally, “being.” Compare Vol. VII, p. 303.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Once more I say to you, I keep watch 
on the Lower People’ You are no 
match (for me).” — “Oh, indeed, make 
me your slave, but get me out of this!” 
— “Indeed, I will not get you out. 
It seems, you will continue your violent 
doings against human people.” 
“Oh, not from this time. You may 
have me for your servant.” — “Oh, 
indeed, you will still continue your claim 
for your wife 2” — “Oh, I have ceased.” 
— “And should I make her descend, 
will you pursue her?” — “Oh, no!” 
He said to his wife, “Open (the 
trunk)!” She opened (it). “Well, now, 
do you still want to have your wife?” — 
“Indeed, I have ceased. You may use 
me for your servant” He took him 
out. After that he would fetch fuel, 
everything. And even the chamber- 
vessel he would carry out (of the house), 
full of urine. 
Oh, he took out the woman. Then 
her husband, the ke'lr, saw her, and 
said, “Oh, I wish I could eat of your 
liver!” The Polar Star asked, “What 
do you say?” — “I am only saying 
this: Go to your father!'” — “Perhaps 
you want her still” — “Indeed, no! 
1 am only saying this: ‘Go to your 
father.” He lied. 
Then the other one opened a lid, 
and there (appeared) all the world, -— 
settlements of every country. The 
distant (things were) quite near, from 
there right down. And even the people 
were visible a little. He said again 
to her, “There, close it, open another 
one.” She opened it again. And there 
were her parents quite close, right there. 
(The father) was working with a hatchet. 
(The Zenith) said to her, “Yonder is    
  95 
Newiq turkinigit, ‘Gumna'n Iu'ter- 
Re/mkin am-ginFé'ta nine'ntitim.’ Te'aul- 
i-git Enqa’n.” — “Guq, 'men tm pu'relu 
qinelhii®, qénagto’e’.” — “Gu'nd, qaré'm 
migto’git. Qi'ffun ratarmadino’a’ lvm- 5 
fia ora’wér-ramke't.” . 
“Gug, qart/m git. E'nmet wr'yolu qinelhr'rkin.” — *Gu'nd, qai’ve pa‘néna fidwin ragna‘arkin?’ — “Guq, tpa’- aa’k? — “Guq, trankaikala'uhodin, ralifmiiena?” — “Gund, qarém!” 0 
Ne‘wiin unin, *Qénve'ntetyi®.” Ru- 
wente'nnin. “Amto’, pa‘néna fiawané’tt 
tegge'irrkin?” — “Gund, gapa‘ai-giim. 
E'nmet gipilu qinelhr'rkin.” Yito'nen. 15 
E'nmen nuhenriu’leet, ge'mge-re‘qalin. 
Ne'me eéu’ulhin rinei’va niftunne/qin. 
Gug, ie’us'qit tm yito'nén. E'nmen 
uwd/quiti lunin, kele'td.  *Gug, iw'ks 
miponto’rkin-é-git.” Ilu'kal-Eie’rd pin- 
Io'nén, “Re¥qa ni'ugin?’ — “Attau'm 
nini'w-i-im En-fo’t, ‘ELige’t qi lqtyit.’ 
— “E'ur im pa’néna retegge’frrkin® — 
“Gu'nd, e’Le. Attau’ nini'w-i-im En‘fio’t, 
‘eLigt’tn qlgatyi®.’”  Nivraqin. 20 
E'nmen  kairgai'pm  ruwente'nnin, 
ur tm vai wo'tqan fia’rginén, ge'mge- 
nute’kin Gm n’mnim, yaa'kén Gm vai, 
em-&Uméeqii Enki qalére.  E'nmen 
ki‘tkit nuurre’tqinet ora’wérat. Ne'me 30 
unin, *Taga'm, qannuma’tym. Elvelin 
qanve'ntetym.”  Ne/me  ruwentennin. 
E’un tm ELgIt Gm &'méeqi, ginu’r im 
vai eniiin'.  E'nmen niga‘thatkogeén. 
Tunin, “Na‘an im fian £Xgin gini'n.” 35

----

96 
your father.” He said again, “There, 
close it.” Then he said to the woman, 
“You feel lonesome? Open the trunk 
to the eastern side.” (It was full of) 
seals. He said again to her, “Close 
it” This time the next one. Oh, 
thong-seals. 
Again (he said), “Close it.” He said, 
“These I am giving without distinction 
to the possessors of bad dishes.” 
Again she opened another one. (It 
was full of) white whale. “These Iam 
giving to (those whose) dishes (are) 
sniffed (at by) dogs” Again she 
opened another one. (It was full of) 
walrus, “These I give to those who 
bring sacrifices.” 
Again she opened another one. And 
(it was full of) gray foxes. “These 
give to the possessors of good clean 
dishes.” Again she opened another one. 
This time there were blue foxes. “These 
1 give to the possessors of dishes newly 
made.” Again she opened another one. 
Oh, fur-scals! She opened another 
one. It was filled with squirrels. 
“These 1 give without distinction.” 
Again she opened another one. This 
time it was filled with hares. “These 
I give to the hungry ones.” She opened 
another one. This time it (was full of) 
wild reindeer. “These here 1 give 
without distinction to the poor ones.” 
She opened another one. This time it 
(was full of) wolves. “These I give 
to those in need of fur trimming.” 
Then the western side. Again she 
opened another one, and they saw a group of houses. “Yonder is your 
country.” Her father was rich in rein- 
deer. And they saw also his herd. 
(The Zenith) spoke thus: “Yonder white-   'BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Ne'me i'wkwi!, *Taga'm, qannima’t!’ 
E'nmen {unin feusqd’t, “Elerei? 
Cel qinve'ntetyn  aivaronqa’tkén.” 
E’nmen m¢'mil. Nee i‘unin, “Qannr- 
ma'tym.” Enfa’q Enki &iméelin. Unel. 5 
Ne‘me, “Qannima’t” Ni‘ugin, “En- 
qana’t ELOn vai timii-a‘lvalag a‘ga’- 
kamaanve’tt nine’ili-im.” Ne'me qor 
ruwente’nnin. Pu'req. *Enga‘nat ELo'n- 
dm a¥tti-ylio-kamaanvé'ts nine’ili-tm.” 10 
Ne/me qor ruwentennin.  Enfa’q ri'rk. 
“Enqa’nat ELo'n taaronya'nvétr ninefil 
iim.” 
Qol-tim ne’me ruwente'nnin, eu gé- 
la’rgin. “Enqana’t £Lo'n am-tai-kithe'm- 
kamaanve'ts nineili-im.” Ne'me qor 
ruwentc/nnin.  Enfa’q dm tinu’p.  “En- 
qa’nat tm ELo'n tot-tai’ka-kamaanve'tr 
nine’il1-im.” Qon ne‘me ruwente’nnin. 
Guq, kupge’Lun. Qol-iim neme ruwen- 20 
te/nnin, am-rav'lifia geyire’yin. *Enqa’- nat timii-a‘lvalag nine/il-i-tm.” 5 
Ne'me qor rawente/nnin,  Enfa’q mi- 
lute'ti geyrellin, “Enqa’n  gitulé'n 
nineilitm”  Ne'me qolim ruwen- 25 
te'nnin. Enfa’qilvily’.  “Enfa’q im fo- 
&'tn tima-alvalag nine’il-im.” Ne‘me 
qor ruwente’nnin. Enfa‘q aL “En- 
qa'n ractmgurgiile’ts nineil-i-im.”    
enqa’m  aigvqantakén.  E'nmen 30 
qor ruwente/nnin, yara’-géné'w lu¥ninet. “Ga'nqan EL0'n gini'n nu'tenut.” Na 
qam tm fautu EL’gm. Ym Enga’n 
aelvil niunin.  I'wkwi® Envio't, “Na'- 
anqan &'lhar a*-qe’ku tegge'iu tilhr'rkin. 85

----

* BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
haired barren doe I do desire to have. 
It is an object of my old desire, be- 
cause I have none such. Also the buck 
of yellow and white mixed. And that, too, with one leg white.” 
“Oh, you feel lonesome! Return 
home.” And before evening came he 
made her descend. The woman was 
seen by one who came out at her call. 
Then (the person) re-entered the house. 
“What woman is there?” 
The father went out. “Oh, whence, 
from what land, do you come?” — *At 
one time I belonged to this land.” — 
“Oh, what kind of a woman are you?” 
— “It seems that you have given me in marriage to a kels” — “Oh, then 
it is you!” — “Indeed, 1” — “Where 
do you come from?* — “I come from 
the god [being].” — “From what being?" 
— “From the Polar Star. He must be given a barren doe, also one with 
a white leg.” They slaughtered (these reindeer) and 
(gave) [threw] them (as a sacrifice). The 
father died. The daughter carried him 
(to a funeralplace). Before returning 
home, she fell down and died. The end. 97 
£nqa’n gimni'n tegge'fu Inyo. Mifkri 
gifmuk wifi enmotvalm. Eur tr kiln 1plfliGa’fie, En-qa’m qol gitka'qa- Zau-kalein.” 
“Gik, clere¥, qragté’’ E'nmet 
tim fan céhi wulqatvit, keakelennin. 
Qolénta’la nelu’n Ac’usqit, ¢'nmen tm 
res-qi'wkwi®. “Ra¥-ficusqdt wo'tqan?” 
E'nmen rLrgiqdi frto’d, “Gu, méii- 
ko'kén, minkekineigit?® — Cit um wutkekinei’-gtim.” — *Guq, ra*-ne’us- qiti-gir"—“Ti'wkwi'k tm fan kala'gtr ginenc'like'w-i-git” — *Gug, ali'mia qai've git. — “Gund, gum.” — “Me’s- kom yet?” — “Vawgéph tye'tyik.” 
— “Ma'én-Varge'pi? — “Elo'kal- 
Ana'rgupit. E'nmen a's-qcku ni¥ilha'n, eur gitka'qataukalin.’ 
Na'nminat, neni'ntitkuginet. ELIgI- qai vi¥i. Neckketa rile/nin E¢hi 
pelqinte’erkin yara’gti, gapékagta'Lén. 
Vivi. Plagi’l... 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
17. (Battle with the Tani.) 
In the olden times, in some (part of | 
the country, people were at war. 
There were a “set of brothers” with a 
sister. The girl was quite nimble (from 
constant exercise). They were attacked 
by Ta'nfitt. There were probably three 
[of them] (of the Chukchee).! The girl 
had a spear (made) of walrus-tusk. Four   Telenye’p ¢/miton e'nmen ni'qali- 
le'tqin re'mkan.  Yitemre't, Enne’n-te'n 
&a'kigét, gemur'tviun de'us-qat, Ta'nia 
gaio*laat. E’tim diro’rgart. E'nmen vailqa'ten poigin Ac'us'qitin. E'nmen 
fitra’ Ta/nfizt nr'mléqinet gapoigrla‘saat. 
Qol furanlafie geqimei'vulin Ae'us'qat, 
  
+ Two brothers are also a set” (cf. Vol. VIL, p. 539).

----

08 
Ta/nft warriors, (also) nimble, fought 
with spears. All four of them wanted 
to attack the girl. Her brothers (mean- 
while) were all killed by the Tani. 
The other Ta'niutt were also killed 
at the same time. The girl, the nimble 
one, was spoken to by the remaining 
Ta’nfin warrior, (who said,) “I do not want it. You arc a woman. Let us 
stop this!” The girl said, *(Nay,) it 
is all right” The Tan-in warrior 
said, “No, you are weak.” The girl 
said, “Well, now, try me first, (and see) 
whether you can do anything to me.” 
Then she gathered up her tresses, 
and girt her body about the middle, 
also (arranged) her broad sleeves. Her 
spear was a short one. Oh, the Ta'nfitn 
warrior said, *Itis to no purpose. You 
are a woman.” — “You are too self- 
assured. Try me first!” The girl stood on the defensive, hold- 
ing up her spear made of walrus-tusk. 
They fought with spears the whole day 
long, until the sun (went down) [very 
far, the whole day]. Before sunset the 
Tani warrior began to lose his 
breath, and his tongue lolled (out of his 
mouth). He felt quite weak. 
All at once he sat down upon the ground. The girl said, *I will not 
kill you. Iam a woman. I feel con 
fused on account of this.” The Tani 
warrior said, “Oh, oh! but it is by a 
Ta/niin woman with a tattooed nose ! 
that I am treated like this!” 
The Ta'nfiin warrior was very nim- 
ble. He was really a very strong man. 
Then he said again, *Oh, oh, such a 
one, a Ta'n‘in woman with a tattooed   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
Enqan yi'éemit-tu'mgit am-tima’ nr'ntd- 
qinet Ta'n‘fa. 
Ca'ma  quitti ga’nmilaat Ta'nut 
puru. Enqa’n Gm fie'us'qit gelimvi- 
tevin, quitiing Tania gi'ulin, Ca’ 
mam, fieus'qitigit. Opo’ptt minpa‘a- 
whut” En‘qa’m Reus qt giulin, “Me'- 
tek” Tanda ninfugin, “Ca’mam, 
teniligre” Evqa'm giulin, “Eur lo” 
mia qinennike'urkin, qénata’afirkin.” 
E'nmen kr'ttelti ritumkeu'ninet, £n- 
qa'm  gino'nuwt’gglipt  kilve'nnin, 
Enqa'm pota’ka'irgit ne'me.  Ciw'mi- 
qin poi‘gmn. Gik, Ta'nfia ‘unin, *Attau’- 
qu'num, Enqa’n fie’usqét-i-git." — “ Ya¥- 
rat im a'n, qénagaimanéta’rkin.” 
      E'nmen tim fic'usqit o/lvinve gele'lin, vaiqa'tén lien: poigm. E'nmen tm Fm-ale/étérhin, ¢nmen tm trktir ga'- nqan, aflo‘fétérm. E'¢hi tarkita’ 
whkwe?, ¢/nmen ant Ta‘niuttan gete'lge- Ln, ¢nmen tm y&'lithin giule’tin, €n- 
men Ena‘nve geru'e 
  Na‘qam limita gaa‘qelén nute’s-qik. 
Neusqitd ‘unin, “Qarém  mmnmu’ut 
gomna’n. Ne'us'qitiom. Thirc'urkin.” 
Gik, Tanda gi'ulin, “Go, qa’ko, &n- 
kale-ta'n-fi-ia’a na’qam lima inen- 
nike' whit.” 
Ni'mligin tm Ta'n-fithin, vets a'm- 
kino nigetvugin ora’wétan. Enqa’n 
im gi'ulin ne'me, “Gik, qa'ko, raq- 
#n-kale’ta’n-irdaw loin, amen tm   
* The Reindeer Chukehee asd the Reindeer Koryak call cach other mutually Tat (cf, Vol. VII, - 11). The Reindeer Chukehee women put their tattoo-ines on both sides of the nose (cf. Vol. VII, p. 254).

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 99 
nose, 1 have met only now! I am 
ashamed to return home. Well, now, 
dispose of me! I will not return home.” A very nimble Tanfiin warrior! 
“Still, 1 have also despatched many, 
[I will not return home].” The girl said 
again, “I will not kill you. Iam a 
woman.” The man said, “Indeed, then 
if you will not kill me, I shall do some- 
thing myself to my own body. Oho! 
these Ta'nat (i. ., the Chukchee) are 
born (in life) better than we. Here is 
such a Ta'nfiin woman with a tattooed 
nose! Kill me, now! Shall I come 
home without shame? Never! And, 
indeed, even if 1 should return home, my father would not allow me to live. 
He would say, ‘Oh, you were over- 
powered by a mere woman!” “Tell me, have you brothers still?” — “Yes, I have one brother.” — “This spear of mine give to your brother.” — 
“I cannot do this. They will blame me. 
They will say, ‘Where have you found 
this spear, being a woman?” 
“Surely, 1 will not go home. Take 
also this armor of mine. But first I 
shall take a smoke of tobacco.” He 
would not listen to any persuasion. He 
wanted to die. 
He had a smoke. As soon as he took the pipe out of his mouth, she 
stabbed him, and he fell on his back. (He lay there, touching the ground) 
merely with his calves, with his shoulder- blades, and with the other fleshy parts of his body. He lay (with the small of his back) quite on high. So strong was he. Then he died, and came to his end.   fot. Trwkiaarkin ra‘gtk.  A‘men 
im qinennike'wkwi’. Qaré'm mra’g- 
tak.” 
E'tqi mln Tanfma’qu. “Nim. 
Kigin tmu'mkewkwi'n na’qam. Qar&m 5 
mra'gia’k.”  E'un fe'us-qati niniuqin, 
“Qaré’m giimna’n mmmu’ut, fie'us-qit-i- 
im.” Nini‘ugin qla’ula, *Qai've lo'miia 
éna’nmitka  rine'ntii®, mna’n  &ini't 
uwi'k trennike'wkwi'n. Qa’ko! Tan- 10 
fina’kut paro urcteht. Efn-kalé- 
ta/niiiaw, uur wot. Qéna’nmiie?, 
guna! Afrrkilkam trara'gtia® Qa- 
rm? Qai've lifmha ya'rag trara’gtia’, 
qaré’m rgd rinenyegtele’tys’. Ri 
wki® En-iio’t, ‘Te'lve-iie’usqati neni'm- 
kewkur I” 
      
   
     
“Amto, gei temit-tw'mgr.gre?” — °1, 
ane’nte'n va'rkin? — ¢Poi'gmn wo't- 
qan y&'Zamét-tomge’ts qiilhin” — *Qa- 20 
&'m miilhi'n. Tun nere/lh-i-om. Ri 
uit enio’t, ‘Miake’kin poigin lu¥i'n 
haus qatima’éa?'” 
“Qai've qaré'm ¢/un mra’gtia’k. Mrr- 
geu ne'me qinletetym. Ya'net Gm 25 mitaaqea’k.”  Aallomkelen ruwetha- 
wa'tik, nire'vi'iqin vet. 
Ta’aqeé. E'nmen len koi‘ tigi'n- 
Finin, tiptoe, ruurrinteu'nin. Pa‘akata 
eur, pa'tirga, eun {miitrrga, cég- 30 
girgo’l nitva‘qen. Armadréhm. Tel: 
pi, viv. 
  Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
3—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED, OL. VII

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
18. Two Shamans (Eae'alt ai'riq). 
There were two shamans. One was 
Tefiququ'it, the other Rigowa’r! (They 
lived in) a village. Then the Re'kkedt 
attacked them: they wanted to murder them. The Rekkei (pitched) camp 
(close to them). In the evening the 
people laughed, — the human people. 
Those two were genuine shamans, 
especially Rigowa’ss. Amid the loud 
talk in the night-time Rigowa’mr was 
listening, while the other people con- 
tinued to laugh. Then he said, ‘Be 
silent! Here are strange ears. Well, 
let me look for them!” 
He went out. And all at once he 
saw them. They were still building 
their (travelling) tents. Their camp 
was quite close by. He went to Ted 
ququi. The people of Tefiququir's 
house were also laughing loudly. Oh, 
Rigowa'tx called out, *Halloo, Tefiqu™~ 
qui!" — “Hallo!” — “Oh, are you 
aware (of it)?” — “Aware of what?” — 
“Oh, they want to murder us!” 
The other one came out. Rigowa'sx 
said, “Let us visit them!” They pre- 
pared for the visit. They put on [their 
coats,] their shamanistic coats. Oh, 
they came to the camp of the Re’kkedt, 
An old man was reclining on a sledge, 
— a kelle old man. 
They stood up opposite the ke'le, 
but the ke'le could not see anything. 
Then the old man spoke thus: “Oh, 
hurry up and build the tents! We 
want to go and bring provisions from 
this direction.” Ob, they finished (their 
      E'nmen efie’flit fi'riq, ¢'nmen qol 
Tefiququ'ar, qol im Rigowa'wr,! € nmen 
ragén&’uthm. E'nmen Rekkeiid gan- 
umla’Lén, rave’unve ge'lhilin. E'nmen 
Rekke/fin nuwérra'tithin, gu, aivéthet 
niten‘iirtkugin re‘mkin, ora’wétat, lu- 
ora'werat. 
Ya¥rat Enqa‘nat fiiriq Iii ene’frlit. 
Rigowa't1 Gm ya¥rat. A’un-wethaw¢'tt 
niki't Rigowa’tr gapalomté'la, ten iit 
kul Enqa’m re‘mkan. unin, “Equliki 
quneThrtik, vi'lut a'lvam va‘a’t. Kita'm 
miyopa’t.” 
  Nito’e. E’'nmen e’un lu”ninet. Nitaa- 
ra‘figénat tim a‘men. CYméeqai ya¥rat. 
E'nmen Tefiququ'fina qi'tyi®. Niten'- 
frtkugin Tedququ'fin re‘mkm. Gik, 
cific’unin Rigowa'una.  * Teiiququitei’ I” 
— eWui — “Gk, qaive Ii Ip 
kmet?” — “Ranutet?” — “Gk, ravé’- 
unve nelhimik.”     
Nito'e. Rigowa'Lina {'unin, *Kita'm 
minyo¥nat” Nayo*nat. Init tm na 
pinat, cient. Gog, ¢nmen puki'r- 
gi, mnqan Rekkeak. Gug, eun 
npina’¢hin nariéhitva’qén orgu'tkintk, 
kalanpinaér'yfim. 
  Nitvétta'qénat ryagnau'ks  kelek, 
va‘névan ne‘nlu“rkinet kele'ti.” Guq, 
¢/nmen mprna’éhmn nuwéthau’én, “ Gug, 
qiqiwrile’erkmuk taro’aki. Mimntaqai 
m&’es'ql Aunfilia.”  Guq, e'nmen plr't- 
kus't, pa‘néna-m Enqa’nat nipalomté’l-    
  
' The fist pame means “Good Vulva;” the second, “Hairy Buttocks.” A to names of such character ‘among the Chukehee, compare, Vol. VIL of this series p. 516. 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
tents). Those two, however, were still 
listening. Again the old man said, 
“Oh, where are the young men? Bring 
the divining-stone here!” In reality, 
however, this was a human skull. 
He began to practise divination. 
The shamans looked on, face to face. 
“Oh, we came (here) for provisions! 
The people must have provisions.” 
He moved the skull with his staff; 
but the skull was motionless, it refused 
to move. “Oh, how extraordinary! 
[Dear me!] Wherefore is this divining- 
stone motionless> It is very strange 
with us. We are unable to divine as 
to our getting provisions. Probably 
they have warriors.” 
They pointed with their staffs at 
this old man while he was practising 
divination. All at once he started up. 
“Oh, 1 feel pain!” In a short time 
he was near dying. Then those spoke 
to each other, (saying) ‘Let us go 
and slay them all" — *All right!” 
One of them, before his departure, 
promised to sacrifice a dog. He 
promised it to his kell before his 
departure. The other one promised 
nothing.  Tefququdr struck at the 
people with his staff, — at the ke'lz- 
people. Immediately the ke'ln-people 
fled. The ground (all around) became 
like water, so loose became the ground.] 
At the same time the ground opened, — 
it opened in all directions, by itself. 
The (two) human shamans nearly 
vanished underground, as under the 
water. Tefiququr, the one who prom. 
ised nothing (to his assistant spirits), 
[froze] stuck in the ground (as deep 
as) about the middle of his body, and 
could not disengage himself. Rigowa'Lx   101 
qénat. Gik, ¢'nmen mpina’chin duo's, 
«Gik, men om aa’éekit mi? Kiam 
   qo'ro yitko'mk-wkwun Qari vai 
ora’wéta-lau'tithin, 
Gik, yitkomka'tifioi.  Riya’gnaukr 
nigite’qinet  efield.  *Guq, ¢nmen 
taqai’/pt mmta'mrk! Nitagaiméesqe'- 
wkwan re‘mkn.” E'nmen genilule/sifiulin 
kefunefie'ti, nulveu'qin lav'tithin, va’ 
névan niflule’tydn. “Gik; &éq-allvam- 10 
va'lin, ma’ngén tim! Yitko'mk-ukwun 
ia’'m wot ilulekd va'rkm? Céq-a'lvam- 
valtme're, tag-aim¢’uk pimle‘tke mutil- 
va'urkin.  E’un rpe ermetrlit.” 
Gik, ¢nmen Impinaéryim piole‘tko- 15 
in, getengiwe'renlin kenunene’ta, A'li 
mt kamagra'fifoi, “Gu, te'gripga’k.” 
Pete rk vio? Guq, enmen 
wethawyrta'tya't Enga’at, “Kita'm min- 
ranmitko’fimat.” — “E. 20 
Quttiini awkwa'tifiok nimeifieu ga't- 
vilen “thn, kala’gtr ga'tvilen qatmo’k. 
Qol tm lof-tna'tvata gi'tin. Tenqu- 
quit gutkuéi'zin tim re'mkin kedunen- 
et, Evqa'm ke'lek.  A'men tm ELo'n 25 
¢nmen gegrnteulin  ka'la-ra’mkathin, 
qinur vai nute’s-qin mimlu gene’tin, 
gutye’tin tm en nute’sqan. A'men 
fim BLO'm nute’s'qin gemée'tulin, nim- 
getkuruqin Ena‘nve. 
Ora’werat efie’fulit kime'k nute’s qk 
naméta’tqénat, qanu’t qun mi‘miik. 
Enatva'tkelen Tefiququ'ar gino’n-uwe'g- 
gp giqétvrlén, pintiqa’tik nilvau'qen, 
Iu¥nin vai Rigowaumna Tenququ'a. 35

----

102 
saw Tefiququr, (and said) “Oh, how 
strange you arel [Strange are you.) 
You are a shaman. Have you promised 
(anything)?” — *Oh, nothing.” — “Oh, 
the deuce! Try and sing (your song).” 
— “Oh, I cannot.” — “Oh, try and 
call to your kele.” 
He tried (to assume) the voice of 
his ke'le, but could not do it. And 
the ground was (quite) frozen. “Oh, do something to me! I will pay you.” 
(The other one) said, “Well, now, tell 
me, what will those payments be?” — 
“Well, a shirt of thin reindeer-skin, 
with an (inner) double set (belonging) 
to it} I will give you also a thong of 
thong-seal hide and a white-haired dog.” 
After that, Rigowa't1 began to sing in the open. Very soon a walrus spirit 
came (to them). He continued to sing, 
and several walrus came: they emerged 
out of the frozen ground. Rigowa': 
said to Teiququr, “They come for 
your sake. Well, now try to stir about 
yourself, and so help them.” 
Then they emerged quite close to 
this one who stuck in the ground. They 
loosened (the ground) quite close to him, 
and he stirred. It proved to be quite 
on the surface. So they made him 
loose (from the ground). 
They came back. He gave (to his 
companion) the thin fur shirt, and the 
white dog, and the thong of thong-seal 
hide. They continued to live there, 
and the ke'let again wanted to murder 
them. Two persons came, driving rein- 
deer. These were Cough and Rheum. 
The shamans went out. Rheum was 
saying to Cough, “You enter (first)!” 
The shamans crouched near by (motion-   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
“Gk, tte‘net--gitverin.  Tutefet-i-git ee’filigit. Qai've genatva'tégit? — 
“Guq, vanévan’ — *Guq, treet. Attau’ qitipeitie’rkin.” — “Go, nilva'w- 
&im.” — “Guq, atau’ gu'nd kala'gtr 5 
qaifie’utkurkin.” 
E'nmen  nikeletku'qin, nilvau'qen 
pa‘néna. Mi‘nkri gaqetvrlén nute's'qin. 
“Guq, amen Gm miki qine/nti. 
Enqa’n trinere’t-hit.” — “Gik,” i‘unin, 10 
“lata'm, qunum ineLe'tti qatviginat “Gu, wilh-&rin gaprivima treilhit, 
e¢nmen unedi’thin, Enqa’m Thin 
atm.” 
E'nmen ani fa'rgin  getipeielin 15 Rigowa'. E'nmen tm pele rirka- kale gelesin. Ami getipeinelin, rie- ka‘'mkithin  ge‘erin, qé'ti-notas'qe’pa 
nipiv’rigin.  Gik, Enqa’n Rigowa'Lma Yunin TeAququ'a, “Enqa’n vai nayo*ur. 
Gk, attau’ gina'n &ini't qiluletyi® ta'ma, 
quwine'tyit.” E'nmen lu'ur vai &'méeqsi piuqor- oat, enmen vai waqotvalik &'mee- qi enikit ne'rgua'n, fule'tyl, na‘qam li'ma céq&éaq, nenpintqe’wkwi'n im a’men. 
Ragta't tm enmen. Wulh&rn 
Gm yrlnin, ilha®tin un, eur Gm 
uneti¢hin.  Ne‘me Enqa’n vafoa't, 
ne'me  keleti ravéunve ne'lhmet. 
E'nmen fi'riq geke'flit ye'tya', qaii 
Teggi £m Pity. 30 
RNito'a't dm Enqa’mat. E'nmen Pi- 
ti'yad nini‘ugin Te'ggi, *Qresqiwkwi® 35 
git” En'qa'm ene/ailit nikiéinyo’qénat.   
"The Chukebee for clothes aze almost always double (cf. Vol. VII, p. 235).

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
less). Those two were approaching 
(the house), but again they fled, fright- 
ened [with superstitious fear]. 
Again they approached. This time 
Cough said to Rheum, “Well, you 
enter!” At the same time they did 
not notice the shamans. Again Cough 
said to Rheum, “Well, you enter!” And once more they fled. Nevertheless 
they gradually drew nearer than before, 
and were now close to the entrance. Another time Cough said to Rheum, “You enter! You belong to the nose.”! 
And at last Rheum entered. They 
caught him, [consequently]. He roared out from shear fright. Oh, Cough, of course, fled. Oh, the poor thing 
wept almost, “Oh, this Cough! He 
himself did not want to enter!” 
They went on asking him, What 
are you” — “Nothing, we are just 
(nothing).” — “Oh, yes! You are 
Rheum.” — “Well, I am Rheum.” — 
“All right, we shall kill you now.” 
Then, being frightened, he told them 
everything. (He said,) “Thus I enter 
into (the noses) of men.” — “And the 
other one? — “He is Cough” — 
“Oh, such are you! We shall throw 
you to the ground.” — “Oh, please 
do not kill me! I will give you a 
dog” — “You lie” — <[Oh, yes!] 
(1 do not). Just follow mel” Rigowa't followed him. They went 
to his sledge. Rheum [the friend] drove 
only one reindeer. In due time they 
came to his house. Near the house 
a dog was tied up. Its ears reached 
to the ground.’   103 
E'ehi t'uk neimeu’qaet, migintewqiet, 
nimgumgetqinet. 
Ne'me aimauo’a®t, pura nini‘uqin 
Teggi‘wa Pity, “Taga'm, qresqi'wkwi® 
git” Qariim Eon ge'mu nelhnet 
Enqa‘nat. Li‘'mha Piti'y nini'ugin Teg- 
gif, “Taga'm, qres'qi'wkwi’” Ne'me 
niginteu'qiet.  Qidnve’r gnmrlkinek 
til-eime’wa ni‘tqinet, tr'Lig &'mée nine’l- 
qinet. 
Ne/me {unin Piti'y Te'g, , “Gir 
tim qresqi'wkwi’, ya'qatigit ELonl” 
E'nmen vai u'rri res'qi'wkwi® Piti’y. 
Nepi'ridn qinvet. Enmen am-wa- 
Atipa 4qulifa. Guq, enmen Te'ggi 
gegrnteulin. Gog, tu'mgaqai nitérga’t- qen kime'k, “ELo’n um Te'ggil Eres- 
qiv’kdlin nan &ini't!” 
E'nmen namiiloi'wui®n ELon, *Re’- 
qili-te’ré?” — “E'Le, attau™-me’ré. 
“Gund, qai've. ELon gman From Pitiyigi? — “Lien tm Pit'yai- 
Wm.” —— “Gund, igit tm EL0'n qai've 
mininmirkétik emiLo’n. 
Gog, amen tm Lon am-a’yiha 
tw'wnénat, “FLo'n vai nire’sqiw-i-im 
ora’'wérak.” — “Qol im?” — “Li‘en- 
tim Teg.” — “Gik, ‘men tim Enqana’- 
tere! Ripirkile'wd mmmtirkini‘tik gir 
epte” — “Guq, amen Gm ene’ 
éna’nmika. man a®ttn mihi.” — 
“Nrrigi” — “Gund qai've. E'nmen 
am qalimaéna’es.” 
mom vai Rigowan limiina’es, 
E'nmen e'un orglti qi'tydt. Tu'm- 
gitum Piti'y qon-qa’alin. E'nmen eur 
ya'rau pikirga't. Enmen rno’hakr 
nuwkotitva’qén a”ttichin, villut nute’s- 
qik nupki'rqinet. 
            
A play oa words, Va'qadin “one going firs,” “ringleader.” 
  cans “belonging to the cose,” also *a man playing the part of a nose,” 
* This description of Rheum's dog probably has some connection with the long-eared dogs of civilized people, which the Chukchee have occasion to see. 10 
20 
30 
35

----

104 
“This one I give you. Have you 
a female dog? — “Yes, I have a 
female dog.” — “Through that one I 
will send (you the dog)” — “Oh, you 
are deceiving me!” — “Indeed, as soon 
as you get back, the female dog will 
be pregnant.” 
Then the shaman went home. He 
came (to his house). The female dog very soon became pregnant. Soon 
she brought forth (pups). One of those 
born was this one recently seen (in the 
house of the ke'le), the long-eared one. 
In truth, (the kes) sent it. A strong. 
rib of whale served as its tying-stick. 
He was (kept) tied up. And every 
evening he barked incessantly. 
And lo! this dog could be heard 
even from another (very distant) land. 
“Then the next day he was still barking, 
(the whole night, and) even after sun- rise. In the night-time the ke'let came 
again. The master (of the dog) slept 
quite soundly. So they put a net 
around the tent. They began poking under the tent- 
covers with the tips of their driving- 
rods, that all the little souls should 
come out. Then the dog snapped his 
tying-stick (in two) and went out and 
barked loud. It wanted to attack the 
kelet. So the leader of the kellet 
said, “Oh, what the deuce does this 
dog want! Let our own dog loose! 
Let our dog bite it!” [So they set it 
loose] So they set loose a dog, which 
also was very large. Then the long-cared (dog) entered 
the house. It simply caught its master 
with its mouth and carried him out. 
Oh, the kelet began to shout, “Let 
us make haste” And the master   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
“mon vai tylrkmigi.  Gik, 
gefieu¥ttry-git?” — “1, geiieu”tty-gim.” 
“man ¥iko mmafuin’ — “Go, 
rinete’myuiga®” — Ant qun, len: 
re'pkirgd, Rau’ttiqai ratopa’wkwa'” 5 
E'nmen rage. Eun piki'rgi® 
Pete feu’ttm topa'wkwet. Petem 
gro'e. E'ur Enqa’m, gagtolén gromil- 
kin lo¥0 meifi-vilwlin, Qailhma‘nget 
genfitulin. E'nmen re“win gitolqal 
nu'mgin_ wutiThu. E'nmen gawkotit- 
vata. Enmen a‘mkin-wolqatveitiok 
penin tautawa’tiin. 0 
Amen tm qa’ko. Qolénotai’pit 
ne'me nualomga®n. E'nmen qin've’r 15 
irga'tik tm yep t&'rkirgo’l tautawa'tik. 
E’nmen niki'ri ne’'me kele'ti gayo®laat. 
Enqa’n dm &tm qo'n'pt onme’tr geyrl- 
qiun, ¢nmen vai gi'fingi miteikiqin 
kamlé’Ir-ya'rak. 20 
E'nmen ranme’pu vai ke'akeld oipit- 
koi'va myrrkiqin yaran, uwi'ritqai- 
giniw nnto'nat.  E'nmen  a'ttydd 
wuti'Thin genlepe’tin, gantollen, gatau- 
tawa’Lén. Enmen Enqa’n kala’gtr ni 25 
péniéc’iqin, Qin-ve’r giitepiem kele’- 
Kin ww, “Go, raqifio’é lima a'ttry- 
fim? Mu'rgin 9m afttr'yfimn qarrr’gitkr. 
Ninemilkr'ywunin.” E’nmen tm ner- 
an. E'nmen a'tt’yfin nerrr’d'n, 
ne’miqai nimei’Engin. 80 
E'nmen qol tim resqi'wkwi® meifiu- 
wilwlin, E'nmen lien tin yikrrga 
pirinin, rme’nnin. Gog, kalai‘Ait qolé- 
latfio’a't, “Guq, mingaiéa’urkin.” E'n- 35 
men amt kiye'wkwi® &'tin, eramya'ma.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 105 
awoke while they were galloping about. 
He was a shaman, and in a moment 
he was on the alert. Then again he 
struck at the ke'let with a stick, and 
killed a number of kellet, slew (all). 
They continued to live there. Rigo- 
wall went to a neighboring camp. 
He went with a dog-sledge. His dogs 
were four (in number). One of them 
be left with his wife. His wife said 
to him, “Take also this one for your 
use!” Her husband said to her, “Why, 
it is your spleen-~companion!” 
The husband remained there quite 
a long time. Evening came, the sun 
went down. Then from the direction 
of sunset came a ke'le. He passed by 
the entrance (of the house). The dog 
barked again, being tied up, as before. 
Then the kee approached again. 
And the dog began to speak: Oh, 
now, get your sledge ready and put 
the children in readiness upon the 
sledge, and my harness have in readi- 
ness.” 
They approached again. The dog 
rushed at them, but they were not 
afraid at all [of the dog]. And it could only bark at them, “Gifi, gil” The 
dog ran back to the house. It said 
to the woman, “Oh, attach me, put 
my harness on!” She attached it. 
They departed eastward [windward] and 
left the house. 
Then the kee entered (the house). 
He staid there in the house. The 
husband (of the woman) came to the 
house. His three dogs had a load of 
meat. But on coming to the house, 
the dogs threw themselves down, and A'lmr eaealm, enmen &qeye'wkwit, 
E'nmen am ne'me gekelehutte'sin, 
ganmitkoi'vilaat tim ke'let, tmitkoi- 
viinat. 
Ne'me vanno'at. Cei'vutkoi® Rigo- © 
wa'll mimmme'ts, qunum a‘tto’rguqaia, ffra’q vai a¥tut, Enga’n tm Ae'winik 
péla‘nen. Newand i‘unin, “A'mEn tm 
vai epte a‘ttryim qaya‘agm.” Uwa®- 
quéité unin, * A'men tim, gini'n émio’l- 
to'mgn.” 0 
En-ke’mil oratva’é® uwi*’qué. E'nmen 
nuulqatviqin, nttirkire’qin. ~~ E‘nmen 
Iur terkira’irgépu kala’éhin niye'tgin. 
Trunl nmagta'ta genulin.  E'nmen 15 
ani a'tyfin ne‘me nitautawa'tqén, 
ne'me En-fii'n woté'ti. 
E'nmen  qan'ver  neime‘wkwin. 
Qin've’r dm a'tt'ynin dm wethau'fiod*, 
“Gug, attau’-qun o'rgoor y&'ta qitérgim. 20 
E'un nene'neqagti tm y&'ta-m, quwa’s 
qot® o'rguk, €'ur gimni'n ra’rka y&'tam 
qattrgm.” 
Eime'wkwi‘t um, li'en- gap&nittkolen 
afttr'yfin, va'névan na‘nayrlhaunén a%t- 
tn. Erre’¢ dm li'en’ nintawa’wkwi'n, 
, gin Ne'me yara'ghi a'ttryhm 
ire, Tunin Aa‘wétrm, “Guq, quil- 
he'tyi®, ra’rka qanyipia’thin.” E'nmen 
rypiiannén.  E'wkwe'tys't len ai- 30 
gtpt, yara'i napela’an. 
2 £3 
  
     
E'nmen kalai'iin geres-qiulin, ¢/nke 
vaiifio’s yara'ttku. E'nmen uwi¥qut 
tim ra’gtié", ¢'nmen vai diro’q a¥ttiqigti, 
gine'helin tekicha, ¢nmen ya'rau pu- 85     
+ Compare Vol. VII, p. 563, Footnote 2.

----

106 
would not obey when he tried to urge 
them on, though they were quite near 
to the house. 
They were lying flat on the ground, 
and refused to go to the house, be 
cause that kelle was in the sleeping- 
room. [Subsequently] (the man) killed 
one dog, and moved (the sledge) along, 
dragging it himself. He took a few 
(steps), and (the dogs) lay down again. 
‘The man said, * How very extraordinary! 
It seems that (my people at home) are 
visited by the ke'let.” 
Then he drew his big shoulder-belt 
knife, which was on the sledge. Then 
he shouted, “Halloo!” He heard only 
(a sound) like this from the sleeping- 
room: “Mm!” He stood, knife in hand. 
“Oh, make haste!" — “Mm!” — “Make 
haste, 1 say!” — “Mm!” 
In the mean time the ke'le cautiously 
opened the front cover a little way and 
looked out. One of his eyes (appeared) 
just like a lamp. (The man) struck 
at it, and cut the eye. The cye-fluid 
spurted out in great quantity. Then 
(the ke'lk) came out, and merely looked 
back upon the house. It became stone. 
(The man) saw the tracks of runners, 
made by (the sledge of) his fleeing 
wife. He went on along these tracks. 
He discovered (his family) in a neigh- 
boring (camp). “Oh, you are alive!” — 
“Yes! Indeed, we were saved by this 
dog.” The husband said, “Such a one 
are youl"! Oh, they visited the house, 
and this has turned into [a] stone [house]. 
They saw (entered) the house and look- 
ed around. (The woman) lighted a lamp. 
There was everything (scattered about).   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Knick a*tuqagti pi'rkia‘t, aalomkelé- nat mtaw'ks ya'rag més. 
Qo'npii gapilhirra’aat, ninkd'tqginet 
piikirk, mifkr Enqa’n kele yoro’ 
Gku mitva’qén.  Qin've’r qol a¥ttm b 
tmné'n, pegteme’td ta’nnén, qaiaqan‘ 
o/qai tile’i’, pitkia®t ne'me. I'wkwif, 
“Ceq-alvam-va'li, un rpe kele'ti ga- 
yo'laat.” 
E'nmen émte’valai‘ain yito'nén o'rgu- 10 wa'lin. E'nmen, “Mei!” E'nmen len: nuwa'lomqén And, “Mm! Yorok- koi'pti len. Nitve'ttaqén vala-rinfa. 
“Gi, qiqiurilelerln.” — “Mm!” — “Qigiurileerkn, gunil” — “Mm!” 15 
Qinve’r eur vinveqai Eo'urgm 
tiLo’'mnén kele'td, gite'nin, am-qata’kén 
1éla’qa, qinu'r eek. Gu'n ga’rkiphilén. 
Léla'lhichmn getvilin, lile"-mi'mla nipyu- 
&'tqin mpe’t. Ilhrni’mkigin. Nios 20 
na’qam. Li'en’ yarain mtaalhilau’nén. 
Eun wu'kwu gene'tin. 
Ne'wiinin tm pa‘gtirét lu”nin gio- 
tew'kin. E'nmen fian nile'qin red-euw’ki. 
E’nmen tim luninet n'mmmik. *Guq, 25 miye'gtel-turi?” — “Guq, 1! Kitau'qun 
a‘tti'yha ninenyegtelenmik.” Uwi*qu- 
ita ‘unin, “En-fiv-walitere.”  Gug, 
yarafn na’yo'n, Enia’q ra-pérkane 
gene'Lin. 30 
Nelu¥sn Enqa'n yara'dr, eeku’s'n, e/nmen ¢'un &'n'ki nitva’qén i'me-ri¥nut, 
qiili kele'kin qalelvineiku'kin yrrr   
1 This is a5 much as to say, “There is no reason to be glad (because of the house turned to sione).” # Compare Vol. VII, p. 285.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
It was the contents of the ke'les ab- 
domen, which came out, — everything 
(made) of iron [scissors, knives], all 
kinds of peltries [wolverene-skins, wolf- 
skins, bear-skins], — in a word, every- 
thing, simply a mass of wealth. 
Oh, the husband entered (the house), then the wife entered, and the child 
entered. The husband, being a shaman, 
said, “Close your eyes! Do not look 
up!” Then he beat his drum. The 
sleeping-room became as before. It 
was their sleeping-room, the same as 
before. Still the outer tent was of 
stone. 
Again he said to them, “Quick, 
close your eyes!” Again he beat his 
drum.” And he said to them, “Now, 
look (about)!” And the house, which 
had recently been of stone, had become 
an (ordinary) house. Just then they 
looked on the riches, and all was simply 
turned to dry leaves and to the boughs 
of a stunted willow. 
They lived there, founded a settle- 
ment, grew in number, and became a numerous people. That is all. 107 
geprntigitin, a'nt fian, pilvrntin reen, 
vefitkun reen, valli, me-ri¥nut qu'n- 
tim, eviTin, q¢’pen-ne’lhm <i'g-ne’lhn, 
meri’nut &a'ma, lien gai'mién. 
Gug, res-qi'wkwi® uwi¥qué, Enqa’'m 
fie'win res'qi'wkwi®, En'qa’m fi'nqai 
resqiwhwit, Uwa¥qué i'wkwi®, mi‘akri-m 
ciel. “Qilkemye’tyik.  Ve'tdm 
ew'pkd.”  A'm, giluwtkulin.  Yoro'ft 
peninenu ely". Penin Enqa’n yoro'f 
¥rgin. Yep wu'kwu yara'fit na'qam. 
  Ne'me iuninet, “Guna, qilkemye’t- 
yitik” Nem ilu'tkui®. Ne'me i‘uninet, 
“Taga'm, qire’puk.” Lilepga't. E'un 
yarano ninelqin grnmilkin wu'kwu ne’ 
Len. E'nikat gamit nigite’s'n, e‘un 
kukwa't-kokoa Thin, etuméé'n ke'pukin 
Wen. 
Enki vadifio’a’t, qo'n'pii nimitvad- 
fi0'a’t, mitketvi’a't, miig-re'mku ne'ly4®t. 
Plagi   
  
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
19. (The Man who 
Once there was a father) He had 
five (grown-up) sons. The sixth one 
was a boy, a young lad, indeed a half- 
grown youth. All the others were big, 
ever so big. Then their father grew 
quite old and decrepit. 
Oh, he felt ill, and spoke thus (to 
his sons): “Now I am going to die. married a Sky-Girl) 
E'nmen qol Eurgin, mruaén ekket, 
nna’n-mrlikaw Angad aa’éekqai, gai” 
vE optri¢ngai. Enqa'm milo’ vai 
‘mmei‘Enginet, £n'fi'n-meiae’lit. En'qa’m 
Eagan mpina’thin gepelqiLin, gen- 
peu'lin tm ani. Gug, ri¥nut tim, gatelino'lén, enmen 
fwkwi® Enfio’t, iunin, ‘Amen Gm   
    
+ This tale presents a clever joining of Russian (or perhaps Turko-Moogol) episodes with others which are genuine Chukehee. 
14—JISUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VIL, Mixed tales of such character are not rarely met with among the Chukchee. 0 © 0 
 

----

108 
When you (carry me to the funeral- 
place, and) leave me there for three 
nights, come to visit me after the third 
(night).” Indeed he died. They car- 
ried him (to the funeral-place). 
Well, what of that? He remained there for the third night. The sons 
returned home. The third night passed. 
Then several nights also passed. At 
last the youngest brother said, * Well, 
now, when shall we visit our daddy?” 
The older ones said, “Oh, he is of 
no use, since he is dead. Why should 
we visit him? Then (the youngest 
son) visited (the grave) secretly. When 
he came to the place, it was like a 
house of the dead one, but in reality 
it was only the funeral-circle of stones.’ 
“Oh, you have come?” — “Yes!” — 
“Aha! and where are your companions? 
Everything is well with them?” — Yes, 
everything is well with them. However, 
they said, ‘That one is of no use. He 
is dead. Why should we visit him, 
then?” — “Did they (say so)i Oh, 
then you must go and look for a bride. 
Where will you live? Where will you 
have a household? You cannot live 
with me. I am of no use, either. 
And also with your brothers you must 
not stay, since your brothers are such 
(bad) ones.” 
“All right! Still I shall not suc- 
ceed” — “Oh, you must sue for the 
hand of the girl of the Upper People.” 
He called [windward] towards the east, 
and, lo! iron-footed reindeer came 
at his call. They had iron hoofs. 
These (the young man) attached to his 
sledge and went upwards. He climbed 
    BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
ELon trevis’. E%hi fan diro’kaw 
rinenitkiwe'n tik, firo’k vai’ ki'wkiw, 
qénayo¥uk frrokaw’kénak.” Gog, qail- 
hma’n'gét vai vi*I". E'nmen nenle’s't. 
Go, ri¥nut tm, ¢nmen Miro’kaw 
E'nkr ki'wkwi®, e‘miton ra‘gtia't, fitro- 
kau'kén ki‘'wkiw niallagén, qin'ver 
ni'mkew ki'wkiw nine’lqin, e'nmen 
qgin've’r Enqa’n Inan-ELa‘nyota ni‘w- 
kwi'n: *Emilo/n tim, ti'te-m a'te mra’- 
yon 
Twkwi't Enfic’t mprya‘nvit: “Go, 
raqalqa’léaiin fot, &e'fiet vé¥lihm, ia’'m 
minyo¥a'n?® E'nmen vai vrnvi fan 
yo¥nén. Guq, ¢nmen e'un nipkici- 
kiu'gin, lu'ur enmen yara'qai rnqa’n 
vivlin, qiLii pala'wkun yara’di, wu'- 
kwulhm lu'ur. 
“Go, ye't1?” — “1” — *Eei’, ¢mi-m 
tu'mgit?  Qai've nime'lginet?” — “1, 
mime/lqinet im qai’vE, naqa’m niuginet, 
‘Bron dm &tim, raqalqaléiim tim 
vévliehn, ia’'m minyo¥atn?® — *E'wr, 
gik, a'men tm git qafieund u's qiwkwi'. 
Mi‘fik-m ra‘tvaa’, mi‘fiki-m rétinva’tya*? 
Enfaq im ‘mam gimug ra‘tvaa®. 
Gi'qirei'gim gm. E, Enfa’q yide- 
mittu'mik &'mam ra‘tvaa’. Enqa'm 
tim yi‘Gemit-tw'mgit enfin: vaya‘arkit.”   
“Egei’. E'wkurga a‘'mam.’ 
Girgo'lkén  fic’us'qit gafieundu 
kun.” E’nmen ai'gépi eifie’utkui'; gog, 
ur pilvinteyaipiit qaat ye'tyd't, pilvrntr-yaipi'yitt, goq, Enqa’nat kile'n- 
ninet len’, ewkwe'tyi grrgola’gtr. Kit. 
Ennén vain Enqa’n énmrydn ninet-   
+ Compare Val. VIL of this series, p. 536.   

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
up one quite vertical mountain; then, 
when halfway, his reindeer were spent, and their hoofs were quite used up. 
He returned and went to his father, 
{and came there]. “Oh, you have come!” 
— “Yes!” — “What, you could not 
get there?” — *[Yes] 1 could not” 
He called again [windward] towards 
the east, and then came reindeer with 
stone hoofs, with hoofs of obsidian. 
Oh, well! with these he climbed to the 
top. There he saw a small house. 
He entered the house. A girl was 
sleeping in an iron receptacle surround- 
ed by a grating. She slept in a posture 
very convenient for copulating, without 
any covering, lying on her back [con- 
venient for copulation]. The young 
man stripped, took off his clothes, and 
then he defecated between her legs, 
eased himself copiously under the but- 
tocks. He was through with defecating, 
then he lay down. 
Oh, then she awoke. Indeed, he 
waked her up, gave her a push. Oh, 
the girl began to scold: “Who was 
here? Who entered here?” — “Be 
quiet, you! Indeed, I have defecated 
over you. You are a funny one! Oh, 
my! have you not slept! You did not 
even heed my defecating.” 
What now? He married her [there]. 
Quite soon she brought forth a child. 
It was a boy. Her father said, “Take 
her to your home. You have a land 
of your own. Why, indeed, should 1 
keep you here? You are a stranger.” 
They brought home the herd. And 
he divided it into [two] halves, (and 
gave one half to the young man.) 
The young man went with a train 
of pack-sledges. They passed near the   109 
te'tgin, goq, amen um ye'tir qa‘at 
te'lpta’t, yei'prt tm Enqan te'lpud't. 
Pelqinte’tyi ne'me, ELIgtr qtr, 
pikitgi®. “0, yeti?” — “1” — “Gu, luwa'wi?® — “1, tiva'wka'k” Ne'me 5 
flan  aifia‘utkofifiod® aigept, Enfa’q 
av'tayaipilit, wu'kwuyaipilit qa‘at. 
E, goq, Enqana'ta vai titte’tyi’. Nen- 
ku men ra¥nut yara'qai lu¥nin. 
E'nmen resqiwkwi’. Enmen pil 10 
vintrwkkiméku fian fie‘us'qat niyrl- 
qitqin, gatafiapa‘ararén. Taii-gei'mo 
myrlqitgin, tilv-inirginks, naga'm 
wu'rr tad-qeimo. Enmen qla‘ulqai 
kéttuwa'é®, evi'rit yrnninet, ¢nmen vai 15 
varéutye’aki Enki vai a'lai‘onén, per- 
kiyo'nen, quye’tiyiiki. Gog, plr'tkuif, 
atlai‘o-plr'tkenen im, atfa’tye’. 
Guq, kiye'wkwi, riggewe'nnin tim 
qunum, rilvnin,  O,  marauiétiio’d 
fieus'qit: “Ali'mba fio'on me’din? 
Me'iiin fion li'miia ga'uilen.” — “Equ’- 
liki qatvarkm. E’nmen ripe’t téna® 
lai'okwut. Vénom gma'n. Tite'fiet, 
geyrlqitigit. Ripet ge'mu lings 25 
alaio’urgm.” 
Ra¥nut im, ma’tanén 'n'ki. E’nmen 
fian pee kmifie'tyi®, e'ur fi'ngdi im. 
O, Iw'ur Fugrym, *A'men dm qan- 
ra‘gtatya®n, genu'tetu’rs.  Mi‘fikri, qai- 30 
lo’kim wu'tku mrnti-gir, t'mginei-git 
qla’ul-e-git.” E'nmen a'ni fia'lviilithin 
nanra‘gtatya‘n. Gmone’u duwi'nin. 
9 
Ga'ngan mu'ulgatyi®. Cit ELigIqai’- 
gupd taa%, eun ui, am-pala’wkun 35

----

110 
father's place; but there was nothing, 
only the funeral stone circle. He 
slaughtered reindeer there for his father. 
Then he went to his brothers. 
When he arrived, the brothers spoke 
thus. They said, “Oh, there! if you 
have indeed married among real gods (iterally, [good] beings’), then bring 
a polar bear!” — “Oh, so!” 
He put his head under the covering 
of the sledge, toward his wife, (and 
said,) “Oh, they say thus: ‘If you have indeed married among the real gods, 
then bring a polar bear.” — <Oh, so! 
Well, just bring it. Only go away 
[leeward] westward. Use also this whip 
of mine.” — “I will” 
He went away leeward, and turned 
around to the rear side. Then he saw 
a polar bear, and simply struck it upon 
the head with the whip. He killed it, 
loaded it (upon the sledge), and carried 
it home. “There, there, the polar 
bear” — “Oh, oh, indeed! Now, then, bring a brown bear" — “Oh, so!” 
He put his head under the covering 
of the sledge, and said thus [spoke] to 
his wife: “Oh, now, they make me go 
again and say, ‘Bring a brown bear.” 
— «Oh, well! indeed, just bring it." He acted as before, struck it on the 
head, and killed it again. He carried it home, and when coming to the houses 
said thus [and spoke to them]: “There, 
there! the brown bear!” — Oh, oh, 
indeed! This time, if you have in 
truth married among real gods, bring 
a keel” — “Oh, oh!” 
He put his head under the covering   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Fok. Lien qaa'nmmnén wmkr, ye 
tamet-to'mgétr qatr’. 
Vien piki'rgit, euiio’a't tm yi'temit- 
tw'mgit. E'nmen tm i'wkw't, “Gug, 
kta'm ’ur Ive-va'irike gafiau'ti-e-gt, 
qailhma’n'gét, vai wmki qagt'gin.” — “Eri? 
Nawant'tr, qaarairkou'tn® ege'rgui’. 
“Go, i'wkwi't enio’t: ‘Kita'm eur 
Ié-va'ikt gadiau’tri-e-git, qailhina’n’- 
get, eur tim vai wmki qagtrgm.’” — 
“E'w. Emite’t im qagtrgm. Lien: raivala’wkwr qewkwe'tyi®, giimni'n vai 
tiie qaya’aan.” — “E.” 
E'amen reyuuthi yoo ewkwe'tyl’, 
fioo'tnqat liga'lingag kavritka'tye®, e’ur 
lo¥nin, en” lew'tik ga'rkiphlen ti, 
tmnen, yifie'nnin, nra’gtannén. “Vai, 
vai, mk” — “Qako, qa’ko, qai 
hina'nget. Kita'm enfa’q kei'fin qag- gn” — Ew’       
Qaara'gn ege'rgui®, iwkwi® snot, unin, *Guq, vai ninen‘di‘urkm am fot 
ofa’q, ‘Kein qagugin’® — “Am ‘men, gu'nd qagt'gin emite’t dm.” 
    
   
Penine/mil ri‘anin, kr plinén tim leuk, 
ne/me man, rra’gtannén, puki‘rgi® 
yarak, fwkwi® Eni”, i'unin, “Vai, vai, 
keifin!” — *Qa’ko, qa’ko, qailhma'n-- 
ét. Enfa’q Um naga’m e'ur vai qir'pe 
Irevamikn  gafau'tiiiegit, kelem 
qagtrgin” — *Adymiia’ 
Go, Aawané'tt qaaraéikou'tr ege/rgui’ :   
+ Compare Vol. VII, p. 303. 4 «Quamn” is a sledge with a covering, in which brides aod young mothers with nursing babies are transported (see Vol. VIL of this series, p. 92). 0

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
of the sledge, towards his wife, (and 
said,) “This time they say again, ‘Now 
bring a kel!” — “Oh, oh! is that so? 
All right, just bring it. What of that?” 
She took her bag and rummaged 
(among its contents). Then she pulled 
out a pair of gloves. They had quite long claws on their finger-ends. [Quite 
long-clawed they were]. “These two 
dogs of mine you must take with you.” 
He went away [windward] eastward. The dogs pulled the sedges. On the 
way one of the dogs began to speak: 
“Let us take the trail along that 
mountain-slope! A house will appear 
there. There we will go. They (the 
ke'let) are many there.” 
Indeed, he saw a group of houses. 
The houses were full of people. They 
were quite numerous. They occupied 
themselves with tossing on a walrus- 
hide! They also had footraces. As 
soon as they saw him, they rushed at 
him. “Oh, oh! a guest, a guest! Let 
us size him!® They came nearer, but the dogs 
sprang at them. And with their long 
claws they lacerated all the kelet. 
Oh, they stopped. “Ah, bring the 
little old woman, the one dying from 
old age.” Indeed, they brought out the 
little old worhan, very decrepit. Oh, she opened her mouth. Within the 
mouth were visible all kinds of game. 
(The man and his dogs), however, 
nearly died from it. He took her 
along and carried her to his house. 
And then he shouted again, “There, 
there! 1 brought the kelle. Pay at- 
tention, all of you! Come here all at 
once!” The people came. The little   rin 
*Li‘mfa enfa’q fio’un ni'ugdet: ‘Enfa’q 
kele qagtrgm.’” “Qa’ko, €'wi. 
Emite’t om, qagt/gin. Yiqqdi tm 
ra¥nut.”  E'nmen tm tei'uthin im ei- 
minnin, taioth¢'tr goi‘pitkolén, na’qam 
emr'ngit yito'nenat. En-qa’m vai qolo’ 
qolo’ vagryhit mmei'sqinet. Ya“rat 
iul-vegelt. “Wo'tqaat gimni'n fif'riq 
a¥ttit, enqa‘at qédimi‘tmet.” 
Ne'me aigepti ewkwe'tys't, pegte- 
me'tyd't a¥tut. Lu‘ur qol a'ttn tila'ma. 
wethauo’s, “Ga‘angan Gm mnu‘un 
minré‘thupgatn, yara'it reu'rretyi®, fen" 
ku imkaqin, fe'nfi mmle'mik.” 
Qailhma'n-get yara'ge'néw lunin, mig-re'mkin £'nkd, nilhmimkéqin n- répalipt’akogén, niratvunréla’qénat; go, lien gelu®linet, gapénhtkoro'lénat “Ga, ga, re/mkilm!  Remkilo'n, rem- kilo'n!” A'men tim minei mityan Ven!” 
Nincimeu'qinet, len a”tta gape'n- filen, miki mei‘fu-ve'gilit tm, keflet 
imilo’ ningimeu’ginet. Gu, pa‘aa’t, “Gi, pa'lka-venno’liqai 
Inpifie'qii qagtigitke” Qailhma’n-get 
Inpifieqai gag palka‘ia®n ga'gtilén. 
Gé, gaa'igirgaitn, yikirge'pii geu'rre- 
Lin ¥me-ra¥nut keere'éin, kime'g viva 
¢/nmen,  Rile'nnin tm vai, ripkire/nnin 
tm ya'rak. 
E'nmen tm eineuninet Wer, “Go, vai. Kelle tre'tyi'n, qipegtine'tyitkr, 
milo’ qaye’tyik.” Re‘'mkin im ge'etin.   
Compare Vol. VII, p. 410. 30

----

112 
old woman simply opened her mouth. 
Oh, the people were quick to die. All 
of them perished. And so he killed 
them and destroyed all. The end. BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Gaa'figirgarén lien mpiiiev’qéi. Go, 
nutyuwi¥qin tim re‘mkm.  Veltkota'a’t 
milo’, a‘men im ELo’n timr'tkonénat, 
ku'nninet milo’, Pligi’. 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
20. (The Man who visited the Polar Bears) 
Once (there were) two Polar-Bear 
women. They landed (on shore. They 
were) very pretty. On the land a man 
saw them. He married one, and took 
her home and anointed her.! The man 
walked around all the time, and brought 
home wild reindeer. The Polar-Bear 
woman soon brought forth two boys. 
During one of the usual walks of 
the man, the brothers came to the 
shore, — the Polar Bears. They wanted 
to take her away to their home. The 
woman obeyed. She said, “I will only 
put the children into my car.” They 
went away to the country of the Polar 
Bears. 
The man came home, [the husband], but the wife was not there. He ques- 
tioned his mother, and said, “Where 
is the woman? — “Her brothers long 
ago carried away that Polar-Bear 
woman.” He said to his mother, “Make 
some (new) boots for me.” He himself 
worked and made a bow and arrows. 
The mother made boots for him. 
Oh, she finished (them). Then he 
departed. He shot (an arrow) towards 
the open (sea), and land was created. 
This was the path of his arrow. When 
this land had been gone through and 
the boots worn out, he threw away the 
boots and shot again. Again (a strip)   E'nmen firiq umaqit feusqitti 
gempe'linet, nite’griginet, em-nu'fike 
qla’ulqaia lu¥ninet, qol ma'tanén, rira’g- 
tannén, nyrrrau’nén. A'mkiniéo getei 
vutkuti qla‘ulqai, vil’ geriuld, pe'ze 
fif'riq Ai'nqaiti yito'nénat wma-fie'us 
qita. 
snqa’m  qulitdei’vutkuk  yiemit- tw'mgit gempe'linet w'mgat, naranrag- 
tanina’n. Ne'us-qat walo'mge®, i'wkwi® eno: “Lien Ainqaiti viluéku mr yo'mat.” Ga'ngan omqa’nota’gti pii- 
kirgit. 
Qla'ulqai piiki'rgi® uwa’qué, e'un i'd 
fie’win. ELa’qai pinle‘nén, ‘unin, “¢'mi 
ficusqit? — “Yidemittu'mgi telen- 
yep gagtlén wmgi-fieusqat fo'on.” 
Tunin, “Pll qteikigmet”  ELo'n 
tameniica’ty®", 1rt tefknin, me¥mit, 
eur ELa‘qai nitepleAdiletqin. 
Guq, pirtkui®. Ewkwelerkm. E'n- men gino'nétr ge'rr'tkulin, enmen eur 
notasqr'yfin gene'sin, Enqa’n mamikin 
tila’n. E'nmen ritelpennin Ym nute’s'- 
qin, plekt ewkwi't, eur ple’kit rn-   
UA part of the marriage ritual (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 594). 20

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
of land was created in the same 
direction. 
He put on other boots and depated 
again. The strip of land came to an 
end. He again threw away his boots, put on other boots, shot (an arrow), 
and a new strip of land was created. 
Only one arrow remained (in his pos- 
session). Again (the land) came to 
an end, a shore appeared. He shot 
again. No arrows were left, but he 
passed the night on the confines of a 
settlement. 
The next morning he saw children 
walking along in the open. (These were his sons.) They grew up very 
fast. He asked them, ‘Have you a 
father?” — “We have not. (Our) 
uncles brought us here.” — “Who is 
your mother?” — She is a Polar-Bear 
woman.” Then he told them, “You are children of mine.” 
The children went home, and said 
to their mother, “Our father has come.” — “Where can he have come from? 
What kind of a father? It is far. 
How could he do it? He lives on the other side of the sea. There, let me 
go and have a look myself” She 
went to him and saw him. She said 
to him, ‘What do you want? Two 
Kota'tke’ monsters we have for neigh- 
bors. They will kill you” He said, 
“Have 1 come for life? I came for 
death.” [The set of] her brothers had gone 
to sea to seek game, — [the set of] 
those Polar Bears. Then he entered. 
The brothers came back, and all at 
once said, “Oh, oh, our house smells 
(of something) bad! What have you   13 
tminet, ne’me ri‘tkui. 
Qin tomwa'tyé® Aen. 
Ne'me elvellinet plekit yrmnénat, 
ne’me ewkwe'tyi, ritelpennin nute’s- 
qin, ne'me rYntminet pleki, ne'me 
pla’gtiet, ritkuif, nota’s'qa-towwa'tye® 
ga'nqan. Guq, Enne'n’ ma¥qu nelyit. 
Ne‘me rite/lpennin, nute’-urre'tyi 
'tkui, ewkwe'tyi®, ne’'me ui‘fid ne'lyi® 
e/mikd, rata’gnik ki'wkwi', Ne’me nute’s- 
  wrga’tik im Inefi Gm notaip lei’'wulit 
fiigqiiti lu¥ninet. Pe'Le gemeifieLinet. 
Pmlo'nénat, “Gerrgi-turi?” — “Ui. 
Endi'wi ga'gtimert.” — “Me’din tim 
Ela’? — “E'nmen u'mqi-fie’'us'qat.” 
Tuninet, *Giimuketu'ri Enga’n kmi'fi- 
tu'ri.” 
E'nmen ra'gta®t, md iwkwit, 
“xg gelerin — “Méko miyet- 
yi'n, méiko'kén FL(gin? Ya'a, mi'fkri 
nityd'n? Ro%nkuwalm. Kita, gimna'n &ini't miyopa'tya'n.” E‘nmen 
yopa'nnén, Iunin  enmen.  L'unin, 
“Raffa? Niriq Kota'tket ma‘ale 
mutilhrrkinet, nara‘nmofir tm FLo'n.” 
T'wkwi® En‘fo’t, * Yaqqai im yagtale'n-- 
ve tyetyak? Venve tiye'tyd'k.” 
A'nqa-geletalen Enqa’n yidemit- 
t'mgi-gimiv, enmen u'maqi-giniw. 
E'nmen res'qiwkwi’. E'nmen pike't- 
faa't yiZemit-tumgi, lu'ur eudo’at,   
    
TA monster in the shape of a paar bear of gigantic size (cf, Vol. VIL, p. 324). 20

----

114 
brought in? The house smells of some- thing from the mainland I” The wife said, What smell can that bel It is only my husband who has come.” Then the brothers said, “Oh, why did you not say that long ago? Gracious! we have frightened him.” 
All at once the father-indaw said, 
“Oh, to-morrow morning the Ko&a'tket 
will arrange for some game with you, 
and they will kill you.” The Kota'tket, 
indeed, very soon were heard (to ex- 
claim), “Oh, let us arrange some game 
for our guest!” 
Oh, the fatherindaw said, “Let all 
the people slide down hill" Their 
sliding-place was surrounded by water. 
They would dive into it and enter the 
water. From there they would bring back large round bowlders. 
He said, *I cannot dive.” The father- 
in-law said, “You must use my mittens 
and all my clothes. As soon as you 
are submerged, a large bowlder will 
be there under the water. This (one) 
you must throw up the shore.” 
He threw the bowlder, and it landed 
far inland. Then the father-in-law called 
aloud, “Oh, oh, the mainland man! He is not to be vanquished, after alll” 
Then again the Kota'tke said, “Oh, 
well! let us have a wrestling-match!” 
The father-inlaw said, “Oh, now what 
can I do for you? You must think 
of it yourself. This time he is going 
to kill you. In truth, how (strong) are 
you [yourself]?” — <In truth, till now 
1 was (considered) a fairly good one.” 
(The man) made a spear. Then 
the Kota'tke attacked him. (The man) 
fought with the spear, and tired (the   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
“Gik, qa’ko. Yara'na‘qatk&’éf! Rav 
nut ra'tvitki?  Am-nofttk¢’é® yara’iL” 
Ne'wini i‘uninet, “Ri¥nut dm na 
qatk&‘a’n. E'rret gimnin uwi’qud 
ELo'n gelerin Ewqam {wkwi't yi- 5 
temittw'mgit, “Guq, telenye’p Gm 
éna'tvikil-é-git. ma'nkén dm, miund- 
qaline whkwi'n.” 
Luun  mataltyim eufiol’, *Gik, rgatk tm Eon Kota'tketa nerenuug- 10 
ve'wkut. ELO nara’nmid-gi.” Pee 
Kota'tket gaalomlénat. “Gk, re/mkilin 
mininuuve’wkwin.” 
  Gik, matalryfmn i'wkwi®, “son vai 
re/mkin raraletétya”” Méml¢'tu-wa'lin 16 
raleya’n. Enqa'm vai retipe’erkmit, mémlitikou'ts reres-qi‘urkinitt, Enqa’n 
wu'kwut kowlo'ku-wa'lit nimei‘enginet 
narantofia‘arkinat. nqa'n giulin, *Eigule'tkeli-tm &- 
pe'uk”  Mata'la gi'ulin, “Gumai'n lilit 
qaya‘aginat, evi't. E'mikat retipe'tys’, 
nimeiengin  qalvétalhin  memlrétku 
varkin, Enqa’n am-nodé'ts qnintigin.” 
Geni'ntilin, &g-em-nudqr i'rgi’. En 
men matalyin cie’tkulin *Go-goi, 
em-nu’fiéin! Inenpelqu’utkilin im wot, 
naga’'m li'mia!” Enfa’q Om ne'me 
Kota'tke i'wkwi', “Ge, taa’'m, minpén- 
ru'ulha’”  Matala ‘unin, “Gik, Lon 
tm mi‘akri movnt-gir. Gina'n-&'miiol- 
eg. Enata]l tm na‘nmirkin-é-git. 
Gu'nd, gman &ini't mi‘akri mitvai’gir?® 
— “Qailo’q-tim &it kime'k me'¢enku- 
wa'l-&-tim.” 35 30 
Poi'gin tei'kinin. E'nmen Kota'tkota 
p¥nfinén, enmen ganpoigilau’len, ¢'n- 
men a'ni, genpediweu'lin, ¢nmen vai

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
monster-beast) out. Then he struck at 
his mouth with the spear. The blood 
(flowed). After that he cut all the 
tendons on his legs, and so made him 
incapable of standing up. Again the 
father-in-law called aloud, “Oh, oh! 
our guest is not to be vanquished I” 
He slew (the Kota'tke). The father- 
inlaw said, “Indeed, take your wife 
home!” He put on the clothes of his 
father-in-law. Four of the family, his 
brother-in-law, went with him to bring 
the brother-in-law home. They landed 
(on the shore). The people immediately 
wanted to attack the Polar Bears. The 
man put aside the hood (of his clothing). 
It was the forehead-skin of the polar 
bear. He pushed it off thus. Till 
then they were attacking them. 
The man said, “Oh, we have arrived I” 
Then the others said, “Oh, (we have) 
nearly (killed you)!” The brothers-in- 
law were much frightened. They ar- 
rived at his house. But the brothers- 
in-law refused to enter because of the 
smell. Oh, they went home, they 
departed. These (here, the Bears) 
came to their house. The father died, 
the sons wandered to another country. 
The people saw them and killed 
them all. 
This brother-in-law heard of this, 
made a war-expedition (against those 
people), and slew them all. After this 
slaying he ascended to heaven. He 
lived with the Morning-Dawn. When 
he had staid there for some time, his 
family promised in sacrifice a white- 
haired dog. This (dog) his family prom- 
ised to the Morning-Dawn. 
In a short time the dog came there. 
It was breathless. Morning-Dawn said 
S—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED, VOL. VILL.   115 
yikirge'pii poi'ga néna’rkiplién, e'nmen 
mu'Lmul. E'nmen qin-ve’r gitka’rir- 
fi'tté poi'ga ninetvi'tkuqinet, qin-ve’r 
elqutki rrténin. Ne'me matalr’ydtn 
eine’tkulin, “Go goi, re’'mkilin inenpel- 
quutkalin 
Timn&'n. “Gik, @men Gm garai’-git. 
Qailo'qum,  qfaunra’gtatyé’”  E'nmen 
mataliyha evirit yrmnenat, fira'rgart 
ewkwe'tyd't, ur aa’tw-mata’lit, mn- 
twulpm nenle’d'n. E'nmen frpe’d't. 
E'nmen &it omqa’pénfa'tyé re'mkin. 
Qla'ulqai qinu’r limiter’. U'mgin 
kica'lhin.  U'rri ritedmteunin. Cit vai 
gilinu ge'lhileet. 
Qlaulqai {'wkwit, “Gik, mu'ri wot.” 
Enqa’'m qu'tti Pwkwi't, “Gik, kime'k!" Ya¥rat aa‘w-mata’lit nayilgau'qénat. 
Pakitga®t.  Aa'téwmatalt lures 
qiwd ityat, midkd ukéta. Gug, 
raghia’t, ewkwe'tyd't. Enqa‘nat pikir- 
gi%. EgEhin gavé¥nfolen, e'kket 
im Enqa’n Gm no'ta-tagl'rkit, enmen 
ora'wera gelu'linet, ganmitkoi'vilaat. 
mtw'ulpir gaa’lomlén, enmen gar'n- 
nolen, enmen_ getei'nfietin. En'qa‘m 
tein fiplitku eg gette’sin. E'nmen 
Thargr ga'tvalén, qaia‘qai ga‘tvalén. 
E'nmen yarait nénatva‘tqénat, &lhtri- 
a'tirydm, Evqam yarala ga‘tvilén 
Tharrge'tr. 
E'nmen pee gepkitin, vai nitelhe't- 0

----

116 
to the man, “Oh, this is your dog, which 
comes to look for you, sent by your 
family” He opened a trunk, and said 
to him, “There, see your (own) people!” 
And there was that people quite 
near [vertically] (under them). And 
all at once tears came (to his eyes), 
and he cried. Immediately it rained 
there, from these tears of his. Morning- 
Dawn said to the man, “There, wipe 
off your tears! That is enough.” 
He brushed away the tears. Then 
the rain ceased. He also saw his herd. 
(Morning-Dawn) said to him, “A barren doe you must give me when you reach 
home. I have a desire for it. And when you get back, do not enter (your 
house) at once. First anoint yourself 
with (pulverized) stone. When that is done, give me the barren doe.” 
Then he got back, rubbed some 
stone, anointed himself. Then he 
slaughtered the barren doe, offered it 
as a sacrifice. He entered the house, 
slept (through) the night, and then 
turned into a woman. He looked for 
his penis. “Gracious! indeed, I am a 
man!” It had turned into a vulva. 
He had (a suit of) armor in a pile 
of his goods. He said, Well, then, 
1 have (a suit of) armor.” He took it 
out. But it turned into female attire, 
into a woman’s overcoat. A man from 
the (Upper) Beings came to woo him. 
He said to him, “What do you want?" 
The one (who had) turned into a woman 
asked him this. He spoke thus: * 
came as a suitor (for your hand).” — 
“I am not a woman, 1 am a man.” 
The suitor said to him, “Indeed, you 
are a woman. For that very reason 
1 have come to you” He said, “Now,   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
qin, Tiiarga {unin qla’ul, “Gmni'n vai 
a%itm yara'la pegti‘iu nellhirkin-igit.” 
Ceiiel ‘ruwente’nnin, ‘unin, “A’ni-qun 
tu'rgin re'mkin qugite’gin.” 
E’nmen vai re/mkin wo'tqan &'mée- 
qi qalé‘te. E'nmen, emite’t tim m&'rét 
vai protiqityd't. Térga'tye® qun tim. 
E'nmen I'ur ilini®. Eni’ vai meré. 
mér. Tha'rga {unin gla’ul, *Taga’m, 
qumérégtuwa’é, rattanfiau’im.” 
E'nmen mérégtuwa’®’. Na‘qam I~ 
maa {lil uida nelly’. Ne'me nelvil 
Enqa’n lu¥nin enn. T'unin, “A'sqe’ky, yarag repkirgd’, Enqa'n  qincilhit. 
Tegge'nu tlhrrkm. End re’pkirgs®, 
enie’ ere’s'qiuki. Gik, wu'kwa ya'net 
qiyirra’tye®, pl'tku #'s-qe’ku qin€’ilhi” 
  E'nmen piikirgi’. Wu'kwulhin nar. 
kéwd'®, yirra'tyd, a'qcku tmne'n, 
rintitkunin,  res-qi'wkwi®, kiye'wkwi', 
un fe‘us'qiitu gene’tin. E'nmen lolo qaréréiitio'nén, “ma‘ngtt, qai've qla’ul- 
em” Ququnu geneLin. 
Enqa’n mrrgew ma'gétku nitva'qen. 
I'wkwi’, “U'rifan, gemirge/w-i-tm.” 
Yito'nen. E'un Ae‘us-qiti'ru generin, 
kemlilwnu enmen.  Va'miken gla’ul 
gefieund-wsqiulin.  Puki'rgi®. T'unin, 
Re'qali-git?” Enqa'n Ae‘usqatu net 
pulenén.  T'wkwi® mnfio’t, “The: 
undw's-qiwkur.” — “Qaréménai’-gim 
fie‘us-qatiim, qla’ulé-um.” 
Neund-usqi‘ulé { unin, *Qai'vE, ie’us-- 
qatigit.  Atta'um a‘'men miyo¥ur.” 10 
15

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
here! See my spear!” He looked at 
it. It turned into a needle-case. He 
copulated with (this one). (The visitor) 
took his wife home [and brought her 
there]. His herd was very large. He took a barren doe and anointed her 
[with it], but the blood did not adhere. 
He took a castrated buck and anointed 
her, but the blood was too slippery. 
He took another reindeer, but its blood 
was also bad. (He took) an old doe, 
its blood was bad. He took a doe 
three years old, its blood was bad. 
He took a doe two years old, its blood 
was bad. He took a buck three years 
old, its blood was like water. He took 
a buck two years old, its blood was bad. 
He took a small lean fawn, its blood 
was good. He anointed her. They slept again. As soon as she looked 
at her husband, on awaking, she saw that it was a stone pillar} She said, 
“Who has made such a laughing-stock 
of me? Probably human people (sha- 
mans).” Then she cried. 
The Zenith visited her. (He asked) 
“Why are you crying?” — Some 
mischievous beings have acted thus 
towards me.” — There, 1 will take 
you to my house!” He took her there, — a big house. She slept there. The 
penis (of this person) began to grow. 
She said, “It seems, however, that I 
am a woman.” Thus she said (to her- 
self) in her innermost (thoughts). Just 
then the Zenith said, “This happened 
to you because you married among 
the Polar Bears. Go home!” 
The spear that had become a needle- 
case again became a spear. The Zenith   nz 
Vunin, *A’niqun poigi_ qigite’gin” 
Gite'nin. Eun taiollhe gene’vin. Qui- 
mu'nnin. Naunra'gtatyé®, Ripkire'nnin. 
Nitmkigin felvil. Afsqe’ku efmin- 
nin, riyirraunén, muzimul luf-eimi's- 
qata ity. Qu'ergel ei‘minnin, riyir- 
rau'nén, ni'tigin muLmul.  Elvelin 
ei'minnin, #'q"-mu'uiln.  Ynprre’wkut, 
qi mlm.  Krimqor efminnin, 
sq’ muuilin.  Wadqa'sqor efminnin, 
a'qimuulin.  Krmrat  ef'minain, 
qénu'r mi'mil muLimul. Pe'nvel ef min- 
nin, 4'qH-mLil. 
    Rul-qiiv'qéi eminnin, na‘qam im 
tew-muLilin, yrra'tys’.  Ne‘me yilga't- 
vit. E'aikic uwa“qué gite'nin kiyeuki, 
un perka’lhithin.  Eufio’s “ma’n-get, 
qai've ora’wéLa, qiLii wot a’men dm 
re/qi leule’wu ge'lhitim.”  Nitérga'tqén. 
Am-Gmo'n-Kano'ta yo¥nén. “Ia'm 
niterga't-é-git? — “Laulawkwa'irga 
Enfio’t ine'térit.” — “Tam, gimoka'gt: 
mragta’t-hit” Ripkir'nnin. E‘nmen 
yara’®hn.  Yilgi'tyi*. Galoloffalen, Buio’®, “manger, qaivE Aeusqati- 
tm” Em-qilelvind ni'ugin. Emite't 
tim Gmo'n-Kano'n i‘wkwi, *O'mqa- 
fia'wtink: En-din- gene'li-git. Qra’gtiét.” 
Poi'gin Enqa'n tai‘olhe ne'te'n, poi'ge gene’tin. Enqa’n unin, *Quirg-iew-   
+ Pillars of stone, which are often found ia the mountains of 
  country, are considered by the Chukchee to be petrified men, reindeer, horses, etc. (cf, Vol. VIL of this series, p. 285).

----

118 
said, “Let Spider-Woman lower you 
down.” She ‘attached him to a thread, and said, “Close your eyes!” Then 
she said, “On the way there is a dark 
house. As soon as you feel thirsty, feel around with your palms, (and) you 
will find some berries. With these 
you may quench your thirst (literally, 
‘there you drink’). When you have 
finished with that, there will appear a 
small bright spot. You must go to- 
ward it.” He reached it and went through, 
and it was this world of ours. He 
departed, and came to a people that 
were mice. “Oh, a guest!” — “Yes!” 
— “Oh, well, enough! To-morrow 
our people will prepare a thanksgiving 
ceremonial. One man is not well. 
You must stay over night” He staid 
there over night (as he thought), but 
it was a whole year. He took part 
in their ceremonial. Oh, he became 
a (great) shaman. (They were suffering 
of) a throat (disease). The mice were 
dying. It was only a snare spread by 
human children for mice, which tight- 
ened so on the throat of the mice that 
they were strangled. 
“We will give you afterwards some 
thin reindeer-skin in payment, as soon as this one is cured. Also, of beings 
farther on, every kind [of those beings] 
shall be informed about you.” He snapped (the noose in two). 
“Egegegegei'!” (The patient) breathed 
again. (They gave him) thin reindeer- 
skins in payment. He departed. On 
the way, as soon as he looked at those 
reindeer-skins, they were only leaves 
and grass. 
Again he travelled on, and he saw   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
tm d'nintegre/wkut.” Ni'lhi gilhe'vin, 
wkwit: “Qilkemye'tyi®” I'unin, *Tr- 
la’nvu va'rkin wos'qra’n. E’nikit reyr’- 
grewkwa®, qickeg-tegiliar tkui®, oo'nlhin 
reli, ¥nki giwkud. Enqan re- 
plr'tkud’, mitelii kitkin-u'qai rakeérga’- 
tya®. Enqa’m qrayo¥iigm.” 
  E'nmen yonén, praugayi®. Eun 
mu'rgmn wo'tqan Ra’rginén. Ewkwe'tyi'. 
Pipekilht-re/mkik piki'rgi®. *Guq, re'm- 
Kilro.” “wr “Rattan-fau’fmn. 
irga'tk re/mkin rem’. Qol qla’ul 
mitlqin.  Qatki'wkwi®> E'nmen ki- 
whit, giwii'. E'nmen mii. Gug, 
omen tim ehe’mlu.i'tyi®. Pilhi! Pi killin gavéno'lén, Enga’n  AVnqaiin 
Iwulu nitvajo pepekithé’t En'qa'm en- 
qa'n pi'lhik gatrmidén. Nilhrpgén tm 
a’men. 
    
“man ai'ok wilhrnalhin ineie'tu muvee, Emit renmelewennin. Ne‘me rima‘guikén va‘rmnkén ga'mga- vairga Iii nere'tér-ge” 
Rilipe'nnin. “Egegegegei’ I” Viyén- to's. Wi'lhenalhin ine'cen. Ewkwe'- ti. Entat tlanvek wiflhinaThn gite'nin, ‘un kokonalhin vai, wr'twit Enga’n. 
Ne'me tle, GrrgrLa‘gla lu¥nin,

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
a Hairy Maggot. (The Maggot) said 
to him, “Oh, oh! a guest?” — Yes!” 
— “Oh, there! the mischievous beings 
are about to wrong you again!’ — 
“Ah, ah!” — “Just assume my body. 
On the way there is an ermine, a 
very active one. You must assume 
my body. Then let him catch you. You must fall on your back [fall 
down]. Put your many legs close 
(around him! ~ With these) you shall 
kill him. Then come out, and your 
house will be visible quite near by.” 
That is all 
Told by Qo'tirgm, a Maritime Chukchee 119 
funin, “Qa’ko, re/mkilm.” — “1” — 
“Guq, a'men im Eon laulawkwa'rga 
genanqamithau’len.” — “Egei” — 
“Emite’t am gtmni’n uwi’k qai’pugun. 
Eméatoka'lhi tlanvu va'rkin nrmli- 
qin, Fon naranpénirgit.  Gimnin 
uwi’k rai‘puiim, Enqa'm nerepi'regtt, 
quurrnte’tyi®, quwnr'tku’.  E‘'nmen 
miiggitka’k rencimke’tyl, ra‘nmiiim, 
ranto’fin, gini'n yara'ir &'mée reurre’- 10 
tyit?  Plagi’. 5 
man, i the village of Mr'sqan, November, 1900. 
21. (The Shaman and the Ke'let.) 
Once — of whom shall I speak 
(now)? One time Tao'tirgm, [a man, 
indeed] a shaman, walked up river. 
Then he saw two men driving reindeer. 
“Oh, well, now, where are you 
going?” — “Well, then, we are going 
to Tho'tirgm’s in search of food. In 
(our) search we are going to yonder 
settlement.” — “Is that so? Really! 
But where is Tho'tirgm?® — “Ves, 
where is he? We do not know, we 
have not found him.” — “Really? 
Well, now, I also do not know. He 
is quite unknown to me.” “The fact is, we are sent by Nota’rme to look for food in Tho'tirgin's (camp).” — “Really?” — *We are [in] the van- guard. In the rear the pack-sledges of Nota'rmé are slowly moving on.” — “Indeed I” Oh, he killed them there, he stabbed all of them. To'tirgm; this carthly E'nmen, — nirkedut mrtvin? En. 
meq Tho'tirgm, qla’ul, vai enmen 
ene’ftlin, e/nmen getei'vutkulin va'am- 
gugogta’g, enmen luur geke'fiht 
firiq Iuninet. 
“Guq, ant vai. 1, mi‘fkri fot.” — 
“Attau’qun, fon im Tho'tirgra min- 
pitaré’ra, énartra fan, imme 
fia’an!” — “Gugq, ri*nut tm! A-li'mfa! 
E'wkurga mi‘iku-wa'rkin Tio'tirgin?” 
— “Go, miftku-wa'rkin.  Ge'mu, elu” 
kilin morgan.” — *A-mna. Go, 
amen dm x0'n Ymi gimna'n ge'mu, ge'mu vallin, mi‘akri.” 5 
20 
25 
“I“nk dm Nota’rména nen'ni'umik 
Tiio'tirgina  pétaré’rénvuk.” — “A- 
lima.” — Afttoolanta’ltme’ré vai. 
Ya’atrm fion am-tilata iirkit Nota'r- 
ménté muulit.” — “E'wi” 30 
O, tmnenat enki, tnpmenat. 
  Tho'tirgin  Enqa’n, ora’wéran, kelet

----

120 
man, killed the ke'let, being a shaman. 
Then he departed and went home. 
Evening came, and they slept. The 
morning, about dawn, he woke up and 
went to the same place up river. 
There he saw two young women 
taking water from the river. “Ah! so you came for water? — “Yes!” — 
“You women, whose (women) are you?” 
— “We are Nota'rme's.” — *Indeed! 
Where are your houses?” — “They 
are here, only they are not visible from 
this place.” — =Oh, that is it!" The ke'le-women, while taking water, 
sing a song, one of Tao'tirgm’s. “Oh, 
whose lullaby ! are you singing?” — “It 
is Tho'tirgmn's.” — “Really! Then this 
Tho'tirgin must be a man with pretty 
songs, with a pretty manner of singing.” 
The ke'li-women said, “It seems to 
us that you are Tao'tirgmn.” — “Oh, well, how can I be Tao'tirgm? 1 do 
not know him. He is quite unknown 
to me. I have never seen him. — 
“Really” — “Then sing it again!” — 
“All right!" They sang on. 
They [finished] finished drawing 
water. Then they went home. Tao'- tirgin followed, and went after them. 
At the same time Nota'rmé, the chief, 
the strong one, was sitting on a sledge, 
sheltered from the wind, — Nota'rme, 
the ka'mak, the ke'le. 
“Oh, here you are!” — “Yes!” — 
“You have come?” Tho'tirgin asked him. 
(He answered) “Yes! Indeed, I am 
here. 1 am going to Tao'tirgin's.” — 
“Are you?” — “But then it is not known, we do not know, where Tho'tirgin is.”   
  BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
Enqa'm tmnénat, midkei eden. 
Ra'ghiéh, ewkwe'tyi® yaragtr. En‘qa'm 
wulgitvrk yilqa'tyd't, rga'tik rgiroet, 
En'qa'm Enga'n kiye'wkwi', ne'me fian 
panéna’gti qatr, va'am-girgogta’glL. 
Enqa’m Enfa’q firiq  fe'us'qagti 
lu¥ninet ai‘'mélit, naimééta’tqenat ve'e- 
mik. “A’ni vai, amelite’re? — 11” — 
“Mig-tu'ri fe'us'qit-tu'ri?’ — “Nota'r- 
memore” — “E'wi. E‘mim ya'rat? 
— “Wu'tku-m vai, lien a'mita va'rkit.” 
— “Ew” 
Tiio'tirgmén niya‘aqén grep aimé'e- 
ta'nma ke'le-fie'us iti. *Qa’ko, mikin 
yaarkme'tkt kaudiirgm? — *E'nmen 
Tho'tirgmen.” — “Adu'mia.  Qa'ko 
li'mia Tho'tirgin yarat tefi-eific’qin, 
tef-qulilin.” 
“Pug lama,’ — kelz-ie’usqit, — 
“ing li’'mia Tho'tirge-git.” — “Go, 
gu'nd, nuikri-m li'mia Tho'tirgine 
mi'tys'k, ge'mu gimnan Tho'tirgin, 
tai-ge'mu, elukalin gimna’n.” — €A- 
limba.” — “Veéu, qaya’arkmat fan!’ — “Go” Nrtipeiae/qinet. 
Plrtkui't, aiméega’trplrtked't, ra’g- 
ta't, En'qa’'m eur Enqa’n Tho'tirgin 
lumiiena’e’, yaala'ty’. Amen tim ¢'n- 
men evn Nota'rmé rem, Enqan e'r- 
mein, orgu'tkintk nuwa'qetvagen, rai’- 
vatik. Ka'mak® Enqa’n, Notarmé, 
ke'lr. 
“Gug, anu-wail” — “Gil” — Ge: 
gei'vutkui-git?® — “Gi.” Tio'tirgima 
pilenén.  *E'un fiot i*tig mi‘ikri fiot 
attau’ Tiio'tirgina tlqatya’k.” — * E'wt.” 
— “E'wkurga rathéma’un, gewe't, 
/miton Tio'tirgin, mifiku-warkin.” —    
  
  
1 The best praise of a Chukchee song is to say that it puts people to sleep. 3 This word belongs to the Koryak language and also to the Russo-Chukchee jargon. used for my personal benefit. Perhaps it was 25 
30

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
  — “Really!” — “Where he is, I do 
not know. I have not seen Tho'tirgmn.” Then To'tirgin asked of Nota'rme, “Well, now, if you had found Tao'tir- 
gin, would you have done anything 
to him? — “Oh, yes! if I had found 
him, 1 should of course have finished 
with him, because last year he killed 
all my people who were sent by me 
on reindeer (to look for human prey).” 
— “Oh, indeed!” — “Yes!” 
Close to Notarmé was a dog of 
giant size tied to the sledge. What 
now! Tho'tirgin seized Nota'rmé. He 
caught him, (and said) “Oh, here I 
am! I am Taotirgm.” — “Eh — 
“Oh, at last we have met [each other]! 
I am going to kill you! Why, you 
too have (of late) almost killed me.” 
“Oh, let me go! I shall not come 
to you. Iam carrying antlers. We came here also carrying antlers.) But 
I will send them (to the place rightly) 
from here.” — “No, indeed! Iam going 
to kill you. In vain you are trying to 
deceive me. At last we have met!” 
“Well, then, I will give you that 
dog there.” — “I do not want it. You 
arc deceiving me. No, indeed, I am 
going to kill you” — “Indeed, I do 
not want to deceive you. Why should 
17 — “Oh, welll Then let me take 
it now to my house!” — “No, you 
could not [own] keep it as your own 
dog. If you should take it now openly 
to your house, you could not have it 
for your own. Let it be! In due time 
I will cause it to be born for you to a 
pregnant female dog.” — “All right!” — 
“Yes!” He let him go.   121 
“Ady'mia.” — “E'miLon, ge'mu gum- 
nan, luilu”lin Tho'tirgmn.” 
&n-qa’m Tho'tirgina nénamiiloi‘gugen 
Nota'rme, “Kirga'm tm a’mr, Tho'tir- 
gin nila, ni'nnikeun? — “Gk, 
attaw’ Fuk im t'lu¥an, atau’ mite’ 
Vat, mifkr vai gimnin th‘ wiotte 
katu'rkinet geke'mlit qla‘ulté Tho'tirgima 
ga'nmilaat” — “E'wi” — “Ee.” 
  Nota'rmenqata  org¢'t gewku'Lin 
qolo-a¥ttiéhin; ¢/hi-nime’izfiqin a%ttn. 
Ra¥nut tim, pitinin Tho'tirgina No- 
ta'rmé, ei'minnin tm qun. “Gik, a’'men 
Gm Eon wotqanai'gim. Tho'tirge- 
tm” — “E’ — “Qanver galeol- 
hiotina’me'ré, tmmrrkin-é-git. Qin 
ve'r kime'k éna‘nmue® e’pte gm.” 
“Guq, a'men tm qinerrilhi’, qart'm 
gr mrlgityak.  Timlal-8-um. Tinn-lalme’ve vai &a'ma.  Wo'tqo 
rirrila mintr'rkinet.” — “Gu'ni, qaré’m, 
guna, tinmrrkin-é-git.  Attau’ inetem- 
yu'tirkin.  Gale‘oéma’-me'ré i*tik tm.” 
“Quiii va‘aiiqan a“ttin miilhit.” — 
“Qaré’m a’'men, rinete’myufiid, qaré’m. 
Qai've tra'nmirkin6-git” — “Qart'm 
guni mite'myuiigit. lam” — “Ge, 
tam! Qu'num i‘git im mrnra‘gtatyan.” 
— “Ee. Qart'm a*ttu qalhrm, igit 
vai gman qanra’gtatya'n ora, qart'm 
a%ttu qalhrin. man aiek feuftte’pik 
trenurete’ur.” — *Nire¥qin tm!” — “11” 
Rurri'lnin dm. 
     
  
} The Chukehee carry reindeerantlers to the funeral-places of their parents and relatives (cf, Vol. VIL, of this series p. 5331

----

122 
“Oh, oh, women, hurry up! We are going to change camp. We are 
going back (to our own country)! Let 
us carry those antlers quickly to their 
place!” They carried away the antlers, and took them (to their destination). 
When they had done so, they went 
back, and fled to their own country. 
Tho'tirgin also came back. Summer 
came. He lived close to the river, at 
its mouth. After a while a great mass 
of fish came to the river, so that it 
was quite filled with fish, and even the 
water could not flow down because of 
the fish. Some of the fish leaped to 
the shore, so full was the river. When 
he awoke in the morning, a number 
of whales and other seagame were 
stranded on the shore, and even leaped 
up shore. After that a female dog brought 
forth pups. He looked over the pup- 
pies. Some were actual whelps. One, 
however, was [born] the dog of a ke'lk. 
This dog of the kelE grew up with 
Tiio'tirgin and became quite large, — 
a huge dog, of the size of a reindeer. 
Therefore it remained tied to a big 
iron chain, in the inner room, or in 
the outer room, near the wall. 
Then again Nota’rmé came to Tho’ tirgin. The houses of the settlement 
were quite numerous. Nota’rmé’s people 
surrounded all the houses with nets, 
so that a number of souls were caught 
in them. Thus they were killing (human) people. 
The people of Tao'tirgm and all his neighbors, however, were sleeping quite soundly, and not one of them would wake up. Then the big dog 
that was chained up began to bark at   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 
“Ga, ga, ie‘us-qatti, qagaiéa’wkutik, yalhutilime're, nuwaul-me'ré. A¥gilpe 
ai'valqalqagte mmnmle'net.”  Ai'valqal- 
qagte nenle'net Enqo’r, tomla’a’t. PIrt- 
kui't um kellet, pelgintetyit, gm- 5 
te'wkwii't F'rmig-nota’gtr.     
  Ee’, Tho'tirgm ra’gtié®. E'nmen vai 
¥nki elerui, veemk va qa'éa, 
Tao'tirgmn, péétkarmkr. Gik. Qa’ko, qa’ko, ¢’nmen a’ gepe'ti Enne'n, va'a- 10 
mith len gamkruilén enna’, ripet 
ve‘em pilile’tik milvau'gin enna’. Crm- 
qitk fian notas'qe’t Enn&n nipa’néatqén, 
em-yire’ veem. En‘qa’m tim ¢’un geg- 
geulin, ravuthit ahqa-gmné’kit em- 15 
n'iiki panta’tik nimpe’ginet, qunum g1! 
Enqan  feu’ttn  gro'e',  E'nmen 
a¥uqigti  nticenninet.  Qu'tti Ii 
a“tuqigti, qol tm vai qanur kelin 
a%ttn ga'gtolén. Enqa’m ke'lin a¥ttmn 20 
Tho'tirgina tm meifie’tyi®, maifatizha’- 
trio, qolo’-a¥ttin, qolo’, qénu’r qora’- 
i, qaa’'mel meifelin.  Gik, a'men dm 
pilvrnta, yaiika'pilvintenelhryda ga: 
wketitva'ta, reflku vai, Cottagnik 25 
rmo’iiik. 
Go, enmen eur li'miia Nota'rmé 
Tio'tirgina &it ge'pkivin, yrlqama ge’p- 
kitin, e'nmen vai yarafi nwmkagin, 
gangefimtowatu'ulénat ya'rat tm milo’, 
uwi'ritqdi-giniw vai Enga'm vai ga- 
whwa'rolén Enkr, Et tm Eon timrt- 
kerk re‘mkin. 
Enga’m Engan Tho'tirgmte milo’ 
maaliy¢’wkun_geilgiveet ne'nku, luf- 35 
gegge'ulm. Qa’ko, qa'ko, vai a‘ttr'yin 
flan &'wkurga wotttva'ln tmve'tr nitau- 
tawa’tqén: “Gau, gaul” Gei'lqavin &'tn 30

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
its master, “Bow wow !” Still the master 
slept. Oh, oh! they did not even hear 
this deep and loud voice. 
At last, out of mere compassion, 
the dog snapped the chain in two and 
rushed on the sleeping master. Then 
it bit him in the finger. Then the 
master woke up at last, and came out 
at some place, somewhere up high. | He killed a great many ke'let [Taotir- 
gin and the dog]. The dog also helped 
him in this. 
Right after that, Nota'rme fled. Some (kellet) were killed. The people of 
Tho'tirgin remained quite safe. 
One of the next years Tho'tirgm, in 
his turn, went to make war against the 
ke'lk, [went to make war] against the 
people of Notarmé. He came to his 
place. Nota'rmé said, “You have come!” 
— Oh, I tell you! you have almost 
killed me! Now I have come to you 
openly. Well, now, let us have a fight” — “Eh! First let us go into 
the house and have a meal!” — No, 
I do not want it. I refuse” — “Ah, 
all right” He killed Tao'tirgta. 
The ke'lt is quite strong on his own ground. And for what did he go to 
the kelle? (The ke'le) killed him, and 
murdered all (his people). The end.   123 
qo'npii. Qa’qo, qa'ko, qolo™qolei‘am 
va'névan nuwa’lomga'n. 
     E'nmen ani am-yai'vata wutiThin gemlellin, dunve'ti gapt'niitkelen yil- qilé't, Enqa'n vai, a'rgipti gei'gulin a%tta, e/nmen Kiye'wkwi', na’qam mei- ko pratiqityi®, ganto'len, girgo’géa gan- to'len, qa'ko, qa'ko ganmrtkolen kee 
Tho'tirgmna, eur a®tta &a'ma, a*tuchm gevimfein. Emite’t tm ga'nqan Nota'rmé ge- grnteulin, &mqik ga'nmilén. Tho'tir- gmen re'mkn yegtelhi® Enfa’q tm vai qulithi'wik Thotirgin Enfa’ garrnnolén, kalai'tt Nota'rména 
garnnolen. E'nmen puki'rgi®. Nota'r- mena unin; “Ye'ty” — A'men-im- 
1o'n oma inenui® kime'k, {git-um- 1o'n ora tyo¥wkut. A’men tm-o’n minmaraumik.” “E¢’l Ya'net minre’s-qiumik, mingamr'tvamik.” — “A'men-imito qart'm.  Tiokar'r- kin! — “Ee, taga'm’ Tao'tirgin amad'n. 
Eng-nu'tek ne’rmeqin kee. A’men tim a’ garanfnta’len kala‘gtr? Trmne'n, tmr'tkenen unio. Plagi’. 
Told by Qora‘wgé, a Reindeer Chukchee man of the Telqd'p tundra, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
16 JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VILL 10 
20 ®

----

III. — INCANTATIONS. 
1. (Incantation on Behalf of a Sick Person.!) 
When a man is suffering, they call the Man from the Upper Region, 
and they ‘speak thus: Well, then, come down! I want to use you for my 
assistant, Indeed, what shall I do? Shall I find him myself? Iam ignorant. With your permission, I will take you for my assistant. Search for me. It 
is too bad. Here 1 am, without any help at all.” 
Then the man uttering the incantation picks up any small thing, — for 
instance, a splinter of wood, — and pretends that this is the Man from the 
Upper Region. Then he demands the reindeer from Front-Head (the star 
Arcturus), and says, “O Front-Head! give me your reindeer-bucks! This man 
wishes to use them for his driving-team.” He demands also from Rulte/nnin 
(the constellation Orion) his whip. Then the Man from the Upper Region 
  
Enfa’q ¢'nmen qol qla’ul nite'lqin, girgo’lqén tm qla’ul, ravnut om cur, Thiume once smother man heissufering, fom upward man, what wes, qol, ri¥nut geine'ws, gi'wa Endo’t, “Kiam, qayelyi®, wryole mrlhigit. Toto wht cll) Gymy we WelGe,  come, | frasisant © sl hoe 
MiAkri, emi vai, mi‘akei mititva’rkin, mi‘akri-m-e‘un yiqqai’ gimna’n milua’n, Becawse, what there, how shall Ibe, | how though, whether © 1 shall fod him tuwelvata’arkin; ginikas'qa‘atnvok ttm wi'yole mrlhigit. Qena'rérge®. Mi‘akri, 1 am ignorant; by thy leave fora Ll Fave Ske serch. How som, 
evi fot, awgo'lika uitva’rkin.” 
bad ist, without sn 1 remain 
Ri¥nutqai ninei‘mitqin pica’q éwga'nvitkela, witiqai eur lumii, attaw’ Whatever small he takes it feigned by the ane perorming splinter agin, Teiget he Tockmaton, © anal gurgolgla’ule ninelhagin. Enfa’q qa'at Ya'net-Lautt’pi nénagna’tqen, gi'wi Gth(hom) man be has it for. Thisdme the from FromvHesd he sks for, he sy       
  — wr... Enfio’t, “Va'net-La'ut, ginr'n kirie't qine/ilhi®, gaganqa’ane niya‘anat.” Roltan- wo, | ‘FroutHed, thy bucks give me, for driviogreideerlct him use them” From nénai’pt len: tink nénagna'tqen. Enfa’q qla’ul newkwe'tqin, nena’rérqen, Rultdonin simply whip be fsasking for. | Them heman departs, makes a serch, ya'net wo'tqoro Nota’s:qi-Va'irgin nénayopa’tqén. Neni ni‘pkirqin, ni‘ugin : at fist from here Ground-Beings he visits. There he comes, they say: 
“Lon ye't Qirili pe'nin wolvitva'lin. “1, tiye'tys'k?” — “Li‘mpa Enfa’q “These thovcamest® And sll the former motionless, “Ven, came” — ‘Agia now   
+ Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 502, No. 8, ¢. 
[x24] 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 125 
starts on his journey of search. First of all, he visits the Ground-Beings.! 
He comes there, and they say, “You have come?” (but in reality he remains 
motionless, as before) “Yes, I have come!” — “And who are you? — 
“Oh, 1 am employed only as an assistant. I come to find out where that 
man is. He is here probably” — “But I do not know anything. It is 
wholly unknown. He is not here. I cannot tell” Then he goes away from- there (of course, the man is standing motionless) and begins to talk again, 
and he says, “Oh, where shall 1 go? Where is he?” He goes to the Upper Beings. “Oh, you have come? — “Yes!” — “What do you want? — *I 
am an assistant of these people. I come only in search (of some one).” — 
“Indeed, but we do not know. That man did not come to us. It is quite 
unknown (to us where he is).” — “You say so! But where may he be He comes home and finds the patient, who meanwhile has died. He 
says, “Oh, he is not there! The people yonder do not know about him. 
Oh, it is hard! Where shall I find him? I will go and look among the 
people of Darkness” He arrives at the Darkness. “You have come!” — 
“Yes! Oh, oh, there he is!” Here at last he is found by the seeker. “Then 
    
— “Atta len wryole nrlhiim, fyc'tyi%k. ELo’n vai imito’n, qla‘ul — T'S only foranisant Lommel, Teme. Tha there he 
  miki varkin? Etim wu'tku? — *A'men om eo'n tithéma'rkm, gug, where heist Probably he? — But atone Liguore, ob, uthéma’rkin, Emi, nuwélvata'té-im, ida, gewdts, minke Enfa’q FAqo Vigne, Whereishe, am iguomat, nother, wakiown, how? Then from there newkwe'tqin, qailo'qim, penin wolvitva'lin, naga’m ltmfia nuwethau'qen, be departs, | of cone, | thesame motionless, aia be ete, niugin Enot, “Gik, midkri mrlqityak, midki nly”  Grrgol-Vairgen he says so, “Oh, where shall Igo, where has he Tothe Beings bene Upwant newkwe'tqm. “Go, yen? — “1” — Nre/qigit?® — “Atta, ténaré'rkn, hedge (Oh doe ter = Whoo — Sa | Lam sing, 
wyole-tm fot” — “Almhal Amen om Elon welvaltme'ré. Wu'tku ssinant am 1 here” — “So again Bat of ths ignoring are we. Here lu-ipkiin qla’ul.  Géwe'ts, mike” — “Ewr! Nagam im euda'n tm, notcomivg (ves) hems, Unknown, how®  — Slsitsel Bet hen mi'fki where i he)2* E’nmen ne’me nra’gtigén, nénaio”qén, vi*lin tim qu‘num Enqa’n nine'lqin. Then again becomeshome, he vis him, dead though that one became. Niugin, “Guq, amen um ui'dd, mi‘akri, tmete‘wkwi'k, am-gémata’ta re’'mkin Heys, Oh, bu (hei) vot, how Dowd non all © ignoring the people tirkm.  U'nmuii-a’nim ¢’un, mi‘fkr miu¥a'n? man Wolqe', Wo'lqrRamké'tr p Woe is me, how  shalllfidhin? Let to Darkness, to the Darkness People 
    
    
  
  
+ Compare Vol. VII of this serie, p. 203. 10

----

126 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
you are here?” — “Yes! I have come here. Here I am abiding!” — “Oh, 
let us go home! I am assisting these people. Indeed, for that they have called me. Let us return! 1 will take you with me” And he really takes 
him along. (For this the man picks up another small splinter, holding it 
with his left hand. This means that the man from the Upper Region brings 
“back the soul, and makes it retrace its way) At the same time the father 
pretends to blow into the car of the patient, or scratches his head. The 
splinter of wood is put under the pillow. The man uttering the incantation 
is also called the father of the patient. At last the dead one recovers his 
breath, then his voice comes back to him, and he even assumes a sitting 
posture. Then he (the man practising the incantation) demands from the 
Morning Dawn some clothes for the patient. He says, “Sec here! This onc 
is without clothes, this little son of mine. Give me some clothes, and 1 will 
put them on his body” (he stretches his hand upwards, as if taking clothes 
from above). Then he pretends to put the clothes on the man, and says, 
“I have put clothes on you which are unassailable (by the kellet)” After 
that he causes the patient to be carried back into the sleeping-room (because 
  
atta’ milqaticha’tyd’k” Wulqik nifpkirqm. “Yet? — “11 — “Gog, qa’ko, jut so let me go one time”  ToDulacss he comes. Tho — Yes! — Oh, now, coment? cuian wo'tqan” Witku nineluqin énaréia. “Qa’ko, wu'tku? — ‘i, here be” Now bes fownd bythescckr. “Oho, here? — SVs wu'tku ntpkir--im, len tm wu'tku nitvaigim.” — Guq, amen tim mrag- ew camel, ju bere dwellog dm L7 —  %0h, but [a    amok! Wryoleim. Attau’ len ineine’wkwi’. Mmra’gtimiik, minlete’t-hit.” gohome!  Awisaot aml Even for tht was called. Let us go home, Iwill ake you sway.” FLon fan nmlete’tqin. Atta’ lt'mia qol w'ttaqai len gepiiti, Ratga-mi'nga Then beukebimawsy. Feigned agin tome splinter simply he takes, by leh hand rinfa, qalfi uwitit vai ninepkire'tqin qla’ula girgolkéna’ta, nine'nliqin tim he holds and the soul io brooght there by hema by hat fiom up he makes it nt though ty rm about qui. Egam Pg atta’ véloi'pu gettu'ti cur geleutirgrtkutd, w'ttiqai fen: though. By he fther now feigoed tothe ear bows or the bead ratches, splinter only gerrila, miki, y¥aki, qo'miim EL’gin ewga‘nvitkelen Ea'mafi-ELo’n. Lu'ur he lays, somewhere, downward because the father the performer of in. also. And ys, per 
    vai qailhina’n'gét nuwgé'ntogén vil. uli’qul néna’gtogén, rattan-fiau’fim, G 8 8 ql q 8 
  there indeed breaches up thedesdone, Voice ho bicomes, play mmelen nuwa'keqén. Enfa’q Tha‘rgét nénavéruwanla’qén, ni‘ugin fot, wal he sits un. Then fom Diva be ake for clothes, | hess so, “Minkri fot, eviraki va'rkin wot kmihaqii gimnin. Qata'm eviriqagti “How thee, witkoutclothes fs (hit ton small © mine. Just now clothes small qineilg.  Minyipiha‘tinat.”  En‘qa’m wu'rri girgola’gtr.  Li'en' evimit ei'miti give me. Dall drs him in” Them ths apward(hemoves Only theclothes he takes “With his hand). 10

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
for the last performance he was taken out of it). 
his whole body must be smeared over with ochre. 
completely. The end. 127 
Before entering there, 
After that he recovers 
  
nénavéripa’tén, ni'ugin, “Gog, adfioke’gtu-wa’lit evi'it tinypida‘tmat grniki I” Be puts the clothes he sa (on the man), i. «on, 
En'qa’m nénanra’gtatqen ama yorou't. Then he brings him home also 
nénandirrauqen milo’ uwi’k. Gk, qo’fiph ninenmelewe'tqin.   not stackable being clothes 1 am puting them on thee! 
Ras'qeu’nok, ra'tviiok, &wkwa wo thesleep- In the entering, inthe bringing with ochre Soa om ine Erre’t-te/gin. Oh, quite he betters him. ‘End-limit. he smears over the whole body. 
“Told by Qo'tirgm, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village of Mr's'qan, November, 1goo. 
2. Pintail-Duck Incantation (Valo'’k-&'wgan, Yelke’kin &wgan)! 
(A Middle-Anadyr Incantation.) 
This is to call game. I call every 
game, every living thing, from the very 
first limit of creation. A young pintail- 
duck 1 use for my leader, it is (so 
clever) [in hiding] in hiding from every- 
body, not to be seen. 
I'call an old pintail-duck to be my 
leader. The lone reindeer-buck I make 
to wade into the water. Oh, let us 
try to adopt it (for the leader)! Let 
the leader give his call (before the 
reindeer)! ® This is finished. 
Now, again I sing, “Just so, just so, 
oh, who are you?” I use the distance 
(of game) of yesterday, (I use) the 
distance of to-day. 1 make them ap- 
pear before me. 1 cover my face with 
soot. To every species, to every kind 
of game, I become unknown; to every 
species (of animal) 1 become unrecog- 
nizable. Only the soot on my face appears (to their eyes). 
Taking off my breeches, I stand on   Gnneke'tr eifeutku’kin. 1mi-gimni’k 
teine'urkin, Ymrkerrre’®in  ma'n-tot- 
te/mirta’gniken. Qaiveluk trya‘arkin, 
ELON dm na’qam na’téiqén, &'mi-raqé’t 
na'téaqen, eu'rrikiliqai. 
rnpi-welu'k teific'urkin mra’le, kuw- 
&/qitin unipyu’un. Gik, attau’ mintén-- 
mau'mik, mra’tkelin niqolénto’a’n, En- 
qa’n um erret-te’gm. 
Enqa’n im i'git nitipei Aeqin, *Qa'tin, 
qatin, o mikior? Afvékén utr 
tiya‘arkm, ¥’gitkin u'tir, tinpintigeurkn, tipuckeli'tkmn lu*lqal, ga'mga-varate, 
gamgagmnekt'n  ttérrkn gow’, 
ga'mga-~varat¥'ts geurhew’ks tnd'lirkn, 
Tren u¥lqal poa”kalepera’rkin.    
Notas-qa'tkinik  1m1  qui'me-virik   
+ Compare Val. VIL of this series, p. 497, No. 2. # The Chukehee of the Middle Aoadyr live chiefly by hunting wild reindeer on the river. So this incantation refers to the hunting of wild reindeer.

----

128 
the ground without any precautions. 
My buttocks have three eyes, and they 
keep watch for me. They see every 
hidden ke’le, and they make the ke'le 
close his eyes. 
The foremost reindeer I make very 
slow, using the two legs of the small 
pintail-duck, forked in two (from its 
buttocks). Everything difficult to scent 
(I am using) all the time. Without 
any precaution I enter (the confines of) 
every place. I may sleep without care. 
All kinds of game have a liking for 
me, every kind of game has a great 
love for me. 
Thus I have almost acquired a good 
careless sleep. The thing lying under 
my pillow I have for my leader. Blow- 
ing over it, I make it rebound (back- 
wards), 1 make it scatter (backwards). 
That is all.   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
elhi‘erk tme’hirkn, mi giimni'n yan 
Airo'n-lela’len mgrnfirkn, ne'me até ka'le nine'luqin, ke'lin tm 1&laThn Ym 
nellkimya’a nine’ntéqin. 
Afttoolna’ta impéwa'ta ninent-im. 
Qiii-velu'kin var&'irgin tiya‘arkin, hu'nku 
mi, a'qafo’mvalin Ymr.  Albra'rgr- 
riftkr m1 treres-qi‘urkin elvula’q, treldm- 
ke'erkmn. I'mu-gmnni‘ki ¢'lhu nelhirkin- 
i-am, ge'mge-ginni’kd meid-¢hu nelhir- 
Kan-i-im. 
‘mi limkeps mend kime'k genelisim, &wkurgam Zotolén’ oe 
nine'Th-i-im. Titan, /mi échéta'wa 
t/ntii’n, ne'me népéra‘'wa. Erre’é. 
Told by Nikon Tagra'tirgi, a Middle Anadyr Chukchee man, in the village of 
Chikayeva, November, 1900. 
3. Incantation for taming Wild Reindeer (Qaalva't-¢'wgan).! 
When a wild reindeer-buck that has 
just shed his hair joins a domesticated herd, [the man] the owner [of the herd] 
says, “Let us try and make of him a 
tame reindeer! Let him create of 
spring for us!” He goes to the herd and utters 
[there among the herd) an incantation. 
(He talks) to the Being of Zenith: “Oh, 
you, there above! I am in great need. 
This one wants to go away, and he 
is the first of his kind that 1 have 
seen here. 
“Give me your wooden stake! 1 ivilu’ terigrr’g nreelqin fe'lvolk, 
qla’ul &tin aelvilkin ni'uqin, A’'men 
im ELo’n mintagaalvaw'mik. En°qa’m 
riteqa’ut niteikininet I" 
Nalvile't nrlqatqin, Enkr felvile™ 
ki mwga'nvitkeqén Gmno'n-Va'irgétr; 
“A’men am £Lo'n girgolénaigrt, tuwen™- 
aclerkin.  Wo'tqan am &éoipurkin, 
nme wiftku-Enku  Eniin-valn 
talua'n. 
«Gmi'n u'ttuut qine’ilhit, wo'tqo yars-   
© Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 497, No. 1, br pi 20 
25

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
will stick it into his foot, I will thrust 
it between his antlers. I will pierce 
his lower jaw, and bring it down to 
the level of the ground. With what 
else shall I pin (to the ground) this 
fleet-(footed) reindeer-buck? 
“(1 will gather) bowlders from all sides, and pile them up between his 
antlers. How will he move (his head)? 
I will wrap his ears with sod. [As 
to his nose] I will gather withered sedgegrass and use it to cover his 
nose. Let all bad odors from every 
(part of the earth) enter into his nose! 
“I make him into a fawn newly born. 
O (Good) Being! do not despise my 
(demand)! Let me get possession of 
him! I will give you in exchange 
(something) equally worthy to be de- 
sired.” Then he spits, and with that the 
incantation becomes fastened. After 
that he says, “Bring the herd (to the 
house).” They bring it to the house. 
They make a fire in the house. They 
drive the herd windward, so that he 
(the reindeer-buck) will smell the smoke. 
But he can’t run away, because he 
has become heavy. That is all 129 
qe'pt trnpirkn, aivau'tirgipit tinuw- 
gente'urkmn, walqaré’pi tmpintiqe’w- 
kwi'n, nute’s-qig tintipkiretyi'n. Ne'me 
wo'tqan nute’kin nngilvily’ revqal tm 
milke’pgatn? 
“Ge'mge nute'kin_ pérkalhin aivau- tink tyhe’d'n, mifkrim nilule’tya'n? 
Ymt nute-kimérri vilut tinenkuwline’- 
unet; yaqa'ak tm, pe'nin mié-vagliiin 
tprirkin, yaqa-¢ipichu tilhr'rkin, ge'm- 
gerekin 4'qa¥tkin mifke'ti yagat. 
kou'tr nre’s-qiugin.    
“Terigto'qaie'ne titeikii'n. Va'irge- gt, Ende’ funy inelhkd. ma'n tre- tetis-quren’am.  Ne'maqai gitta’gtm- val pu'ru trefilhut.” 
En'qa’m dm nineéiketuwe’qin, qaLii 
Enqa’n &wgan néna‘gpatqén E'nmen. 
En'q@'m ni'ugin, “Gu, fielvil qagtr- 
gtk”  Nmra‘gtatqén.  Nuwi‘ntigin 
yara'fi. Ai'vaét nintaqafa’tqen, arlgihk 
ménko-m nei'gui'n, mt lalay’ nilvau’- fiogén, mi‘fkri nittew’qin. Erre’s. 
Told by KeSute'gin, a Reindeer Chukchee man, on the O'nmilm tundra, June, 1901" 
4. (Incantation to 
When evening comes, I tie up two 
big bears on either side of the entrance 
of my (house), and I speak thus: “Oh, 
you are so big (and strong)! At your 
side nothing ill can befall me [from 
anywhere].”   ward off Ke'let).! 
Evqa’'m Enfa’q geulqatvitd, fia'lgrl 
twno'liike Ai'raq kaifryite gewko'ti, 
gi'wi Eniiot, “Gi, meifi-Enhin-val- 
to’ré, teréqqa’¢ m-e'un minreqe’wkwi'n 
im méako.” 
  
1 Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 498, No. 5, & 
© 3 
25

----

130 
If some ke'le should come, and try 
to enter, the bears would catch him, 
because they are hardly inclined to 
allow passage, [bad to begin with.) 
Then there is a little old woman, 
quite blind, and eyeless, and armed 
with an iron whip. She swings her 
whip all night long towards every 
direction. She frightens away [the 
kellet]. She is bad to attack. After 
that, around the house, from every 
side, two big polar owls (made) of iron 
(are put on the watch. They have) 
iron beaks, iron wings. Their beaks 
are very sharp. 
When the ke'le, the Murderer, who 
is wont (to make assaults), comes again 
to the house from under the wall, and 
wants to begin an attack, they strike 
at him and wound him severely, and 
peck out his eyes. All covered with 
blood, he flies away to the wilderness. 
Then he feels afraid, and leaves off. BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
E'nmen vai ra”nut qol ke'le ne‘'me 
niye'tqin, myo¥qen. Mifkri Enqanat 
nimarau’éétqénat, mi‘fikri fot a‘qaras'- 
qtum-va'lt, a‘qaiifio’m-va'lit. 
En‘qa’m Enfa’q Inpidew’qii lela’pilmi- 
Iiqai, elile’kaliqdi, pilvyntrqantéqa’lm 
Enqa’n im vai tm-ntke'ret ninenilui'gu- 
qin falhile’gts, mi‘akri €'tqi ayilhrirgn, 
a‘qantimla’lim-va'lin. Enqgan Gm En 
dq pilvrntitala’sit, pilvint- 
yaga'hit, pilvrnterrult,  ni'rguginet milo’ yaga't. 
Neme wo'tqan rant pitike'ulin 
kalai‘fin, Tei'n‘fitin, ne'me nra’gtigén, 
ranmé’pti epUnmépti néna‘fifiogén né- 
nantimla’tqén, néna’rkiptiqén,  nine’l- 
_ piugin, nizenpitkewqin. Time’ nota'gtr 
Enr'g-mu'Lik qn-ve’r nalé‘qatqén. Nine- 
mméew'qin, nipaa’qén. 
  Told by Ve'lvufie, a Maritime Chukchee Woman, at the village of Ce'din, May, 1901 
5. Fortifying Incantation against the Coming of Kellet 
(Tanomfa'tkén &'wgan). 
1 make the house of human people 
into a (closed) iron ball [house]. It 
has no entrance and no windows, and there is only a small venthole (on the 
top). I put around (this hole) a knife- 
blade, a sharp knife-blade. No kel 
can enter through it, no source of 
death knows (anything about it). In the evening, in the time for sleep, 
something bad will try to attack the 
house. One will say, “Let us enter 
this house!” — “Yes, (let us do it!) Ora’wér-vara'tkén  yarait pilvr'ntt 
ko'fikofi-ra'ne titei'ked®n, tefi-ui'fd atr'Li- 
kilén, akerikilén, erred rmo‘urgiqai 
nidw'ugineqdi. Kamlelem fan, vala’ 
ken nu'nun, i'rgu-nu’nulin 0m vai titei’ kirkin, ge'mgekele'ti  eresqiu’kalin, 
ga'mga-veirga gewé'tu-wa'lin,   
Walqatvik, yilga'tik, reqatku’ta né- 
nantimla’tqén, ni‘ugin tim, “Gu, wo'tqan 
yaradl, a'men Um minre’s-qiwkwi'n.” 
  “Gund, 1” Ga'nqan, nike'mlilqin   
+ Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 499, No. 5, 4 
      
20

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
They go around (the house), looking 
for the entrance. There is no entrance, and they cannot find it. “Oh, which 
side shall we try? It is wonderfull 
We cannot find the entrance. Let us do it from below! We will enter it 
through the ground of the outer tent.” 
They dive into the ground, but have 
to re-appear on the other side. There 
is no entrance, because the house is 
all iron. They come again (to the front). 
“Where shall we try it? Oh, (I) hear 
the people's voices inside! There, 
now! Let me try and climb (to the 
roof)” One of them climbs (to the 
roof), and sees the venthole. “Oh, 
here! From here we will begin. Come, 
now! lower me (down this hole) upon 
a rope!” They lower him, legs down, (upon a 
rope). He enters (the vent-hole). But 
the venthole is narrow and (armed) with a sharp blade. It cuts him all 
over. The blood spurts out, (even) the bowels and the intestines (are all out). 
And (he cannot endure) the pain. “Oh, oh! Haul me up! (It is too) 
bad! I am dying. Iam bruised. I 
have lacerated (my whole) body.” They 
haul him up. His bowels and intestines 
are hanging out. “Oh, (it is too) bad! 
Let us give in! Leave them alone! 
My body is all cut to pieces. I have 
neatly met my death (here). We do 
not want it.” They leave (the game).   131 
mitnare’rqen, uid atrika, trurletk 
nilvau'qén.  “Guq, Sudan méiko 
mica? Titefet vai om dani, 
trare’n mitlva‘'wkwa'n. A’men tm 
éuai’pi  mido’atn, Eottagnitikoi'pi 
minprntiqatyd®n.” 
Notas-qatrkouti miipe'tqin, En-qa’m 
fio'onko nuwge'ntetqin  aragla‘agipt, 
mifikri vai yar am-pilvr'ntr. 
Ne'me niyo¥qen, “Guq, vai iim fian, 
me’fiko mifio’d’n, na’qam qulile’erkit 
enkétikoi’pil ora’werat. Kita'm mite’ 
tyd'k.” Enne’n' gla’ul nitte’tqin, rino’- 
urgtn tim Ju¥nin. “Gu, wo'tqan. Wo'tqo 
miffio’a’n. A‘men tm vai qmilhe” 
tyke.” 
Gitka’ta tm nikedikele'tqin, nre’s: 
qiugin. Nrw'ugin na’qam irgmu’ln 
rno’urgin, qinve’r nine’lpiugin im, 
mu'Limul tim nr'ntogen, yi'ggi tm, qa- 
&yerén tm. E'nmen tld. 
“Go mei, qinetiiui®. E'tqi tuwi®r- 
kin. Guq, ti'qarea’k, uwik tma'qa- 
re’wkwi'n.” Tifiu'nin. Yiggi tim eme’td, 
qaé'yerén eme’ti lgnin. *Guq, €tqi. 
Minpa‘awkwa'n ani. Antimla’tka, en- 
fe. E'tqi uwik tnd'qare’wkwi'n. 
Veé¥irgin pete tla’. Ra‘qalqal im 
vai” Nmpa‘awkwa'n.    
Told by Ke¥ulin, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village of Mi's'qan, October, rgoo. 
17—JRSUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED, VOL. VIL 
© 3S

----

132 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
6. For Hunting Sea-Game. 
This is an incantation for (hunting) 
sea-game. When hunters, having gone 
out in a boat, have found a herd of 
walrus sleeping on the ice, and the ice 
is not solid, (so that) the boat makes 
a noise striking against small pieces 
of ice floating around, but the walrus 
are sleeping; oh, one makes (the fol- 
lowing) incantation, and says, — 
“0 walrus! I put your ears on a 
(broad) iron pan, lest you [the walrus] 
should be able to hear the rapping- 
noise [the sleeping walrus)” Then the 
hunters are (able) to approach, and 
catch all (of the herd). 
Told by Viyénto' the Blind, a Maritime 
7. To Cure 
When a man (suffering from disease) 
is about to die, and has become quite 
weak, he is carried (out of the house), 
though with great effort, and (his body) 
is rubbed all over with something; (for 
instance,) with a little snow. Then (an- 
other man) calls to the Upper Regions, 
to the Pebble River,® and he speaks 
thus: “O Pebbly River! come down! 
1 wish to use you for my assistant.” 
Besides this, he calls also the East Wind. 
Then comes a great (fall of) rain. 
The river is greatly swollen. The 
patient becomes the rapids (of the 
stream). Everything is swept away, 
nothing remains [quite nothing]. They 
throw something into the water (as a 
sacrifice), and the stream sweeps away 
  A'iqagronékén 'wgan qol. AY 
wile eur gelkilinet, Enqa’n ravnut 
rirka-gtnéw niyo¥qén grihilik, nu't- 
yiqin tim grlhil, attwet piirgirge’erkin 
tim, Enqa’m im fan vai yrlqalit im 
rrkat; gu, géwganvitke'ta, gi'wd Enio't. 
“Guq, amen um rrrkat, pilvint- ekkama'ta nitmempe/qinet vi'lut, mi kei wif'rgirgin rirka’ta va'névan a'nwalom- gan, keutiehu rirka'ta.” Eni fan len gepivin, gei'micinet tm milo’. 
Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900, 
a Sick Man? 
E'nmen Enfa’q vai im qol qla’ul gavé'ifiolén, geru'ceulin, ¢nmen fa‘an- 
qan fio'ontt metkiit ganmtofia’zén, 
/nmen re”qiid 4%lelqaid gama'letke'ta. 
Enqa'm Girgolagty, CegaiVa'ameu 
len eife'ws, giwi eno, “Cigei- 
Veem, quyetyi’, wryole mrlhigrt.” 
Qo'nirtm Efenefie eifie'wd a'ma. 
Ilil tm, qako. Nénanomawqen va'amiéhin, ora‘wéran tm pilflmve nine'lqgin, {meranut nénama®leqen, tilv-ui'ad nme'lqin, na’qam uiia. Rav nutqéid  nineni'nttkugin  memlrya, meri¥nut prhla vai nénama®legen,     
T Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 498, No. 2 Milky Way (ef. ibid, p. 309). 3 2 id, p. 506, No. 9, c. 15 
20

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
all (the rubbish). Then the (suffering) 
man becomes better, and is carried 
back into the house. 133 
qaLii vai qla’ul orawetan nimelewgin, 
goonqan panéna’gt genlete'ti 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
8. Incantation for Pains in the Stomach (Nanqatelkén &'wgan). 
1 call Quiurkil? This abdomen (of 
mine) I make into a bay (of the sea). 
(The bay) is frozen, (altogether) bound 
with ice. (Plenty) of rubbish is there. 
All this rubbish is frozen there in (the 
ice of) the bay; (the rubbish) is the 
disease (of my stomach). “Oh, you 
(my) stomach! you are full of pain. 
I make you into a frozen bay, into a 
(very) old ice-floe, into a bad ice-floe.” 
Oh, oh! I call to Quiurkil, “You 
Qu'urkl, you travel around from very 
remote times, 1 want your assistance. 
What are you going to do with this 
bay? It is frozen. Mischievous people 
(meaning hostile shamans) made it 
freeze. You have a strong beak. 
What are you going to do? 
Then (the Raven) breaks the ice through, but (in reality) it is disease 
(which is broken). Everything that has 
stuck under the water, in the depths, 
1 cause to be carried away. It is floating on the surface. 
Then he® comes to the man who 
asked for assistance, and says to him, 
“I have finished.” — All right!” 
Now I call to the Great Sea-Wind.* 
“Oh, you, Great Sea-Wind, turn back 
the broad river that flows to the sea- 
    Qu'urkil nineide'w-i-tm, na'ngan tm 
vai wo'tqan kefévinu ninetei'k-i-om. 
En'qa’m migi‘tigin, gaqétu’kwatén, mii 
kei Rogho’ghiim ¥'nka, mI vai nigi'ti gin fogogliin kentévinik; te'sirgin 
tim wo'tgan. “Guq, na’nqé-git, te'L-grt, 
qi'trke févinu tei kg, we tt-géliiie, 
atqa’gékme.” 10   
  
Gug, iuk, Qu'urkil nineife'w-i-im, “Quurlali-git peninei-grt lei'wuli-gtt, ginikas-qa’Binvé.git.  Mifkri qint/gin wo'tqan ke'fidvin? Qétukwatye®, lau law-ra‘mkiha &¥nqi'tetydn? E'nmen vai yaqai‘fin gmni'n, mifkri gint(gin?" 
E'nmen vai ninupr'tkuqin q&'tnrgin, qiifi Um Om vai tirgin. Ime ri¥nut vai mimleétku'gin, enkedtkukin, eimis'qi'tln tmewkweyu'ui'n; mpg qewe'ti nrntiqin. 
Egrtkma’gtn wiyolatile’ts nrlqitqin, 
ninfugin, *Qai’ve, tpl'tkus’n.” 
“Egei’ I" 
  Enfa’q Maifi-Afiqai'gin  nineifiey 
tim, *Guk, iuk, Mait-Anqai'gé-gr, fm- 
  
  shore” There comes the Sea-Wind, | ve'em a'fiqa-o'rmiken quwe'tim qinli’- 
+ Compare Val. VIL of this series p. 503, No. 8,7. 2 Thi is the name of the Raven in tales and myths.      , the man who utters in the first and in the third person. cantation. The man who told me thi 
  cantation spoke alternately 
The north on the Arctic Set, and the east on the Pacific (cf. Vol. VII, p. 321).

----

134 
great storm, high billows. 
all of them). 
He pretends that his fingers are all 
this. Then he catches (the patient) 
by (the skin of) the abdomen. The man who utters the incantation keeps 
his hands on the stomach (of the patient), 
pretending that his palms are billows. 
While doing this, he says, “Here I 
am cleaning away all rubbish. 1 make it to be carried away.” Then he falls 
backwards, as if the breath of the 
great wind from the sea had dragged him away. 
Then the sea begins to ebb, the tide is at the lowest. Ancient pebbles 
of this place (these are in reality his 
intestines) are bare of water, quite 
without cover. There is no water near 
them. “I make you into a very dry 
place, I make you into a dry, sandy 
shore. A hairy maggot is rolling on 
the sand, it rolls into its hair all the rubbish from the ground.” 
Then the man who utters the in- 
cantation blows. He smears over with saliva his own palm. He brings some 
snow from the outside and makes it 
melt in his mouth. He brings (also) 
a blade of grass and fastens it to the 
neck (of the patient). He wipes the 
saliva (from his palm) [and finishes). 
The people bring the payment. It is 
sausages. They make a miniature skin 
bag, and put into it crumbs of sausage, 
dry leaves instead of skins, a little 
piece of meat, and a strip of thong. 
The shaman who utters the incan- 
tation takes all these and carries them 
home. He goes to [the sacrificing. 
place] behind the tent. There he takes 
out everything [behind the tent]. He I call (to 
  BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
gin” Afiqaigr'yin mye'tqin; yiqipelu'n, 
meifime¥lun nineific’w-i-tm. 
Rrlhit tm vai Enqana'ne ninetei'ks- 
qin. Enqa’'m na‘nqak ninenyimi'ugin 
éwga'nvila, Endi'n' nuwethaudétqén, 5 mi'ngit na'nqak rir wu'tqu vai, ke'grilti yiqipelu ninetei'kiqin pa’. 
Eniifn: roma a'ttoola’gtr nini'uqin, 
“A’mEn ‘Gm Lon, nughin ya'fifa 
tatirkn, tmhipla‘arkin.” En‘qa’m yaa- 10 
leg wu'rre-iu'nfi, amen Gm ELo'n 
‘main-afqaigryfa vI'yu-tiu'rkinin. 
  Enqa’m ercerkin a‘fiqak, aratha’ar- 
km tim ELon. Penin wutqe'kin wu’ 
kwuqagté (qavii tm qate’érén) te- 15 
mika ninellginet  tafi-afioyr'tkika. 
Ne'me ui'fid mi'mhitulqii enki. “Tail 
kirgisqaine gene'li-git. Kirg-nno't- 
kme utei'kigit. Gurgila‘gla kawrala™- 
ark énnotkinik, nute’s'qikin &1&'piir- 20 
gin rgriga mkawralaa'rkinen.” 
Bnqa'm nine’ttugin ewga‘nvitkola. 
En‘qa’m ni‘tkin kagré’Lifim nénated- 
kala'réqen, fiargmoi'pti 4*lelqai néna’g- tigén, ninenlige’tqin yikrrgitrku, va¥- 
glifim néna’gtigén, enmithik nineni'sit- 
qin. Ninefingetuwe'qin nipht'tkugin. 
Ine'cet mnfa’q nrgtogen. Ro'rat. Tei’ 
uthiqi ninetei’kaqin miplu/qin, nk 
ro'rat nénayo’qén, En'qa’m kokofa'lhin 
ne'hu, tekiChitulqdi, memieé/chm tm 
vai. 25 
30 
Enefili vai ewganvitkola nénan- 
ra/gtatqén, ninentipkire'tqin. Ragrol 
metr nilqitqin, Enki witku néna’gto- 35 
qén ragro'lmik, ro’rat tm néna’nmiiqén 
vala'ta, qaa’nmiyom vai. Ninenntit-

----

BOGORAS, CHUI 
stabs the pieces of sausage with his 
knife: these are his reindeer for slaugh- 
ter. He scatters the sacrifice to the 
Substance of Incantation, all the thongs 
[he scatters], the beads and the tobacco 
[he scatters]. 
Then he finishes, and enters the 
house. Evening comes, and they enter 
the inner room. They get up (the 
next morning), and they visit the patient 
[of yesterday] again. They say, “Hallo! 
(How are you?’ — “Indeed, I am a 
little better.” 
Then (the shaman) fetches a small 
river? and puts it into the chamber 
vessel, to be used (afterwards) as an 
(additional). cure, With this they rub 
him all over. From that time on, (the 
patient) begins to improve, and (in due 
time) recovers altogether. That is all. KCHEE TEXTS. 135 
kugin Ewga’nvu-Va'rgéts, Ymr fiflhin 
nineni'ntitkugin, kailelaThin, mr ta’aq 
nineni'ntitkuqin. 
nko miplftkugin, nre’s qiugin, nuul- qatvi‘qin, magnet, nko niggeuqi- 
net, ai'vikén ten nenayopa'tqén, 
nini‘ugin, “Amto? — *Qai've, mab 
eto'péel.” 
Enfa’q veemqii néna‘gtiqén niplu- 
qineqai, éu'ulht néna’yogén, male’ehil- 
qal.  Ca'ma ninegitew'qin e’nmen. 
Enkete’gnik milo’ nimelewqin, qo'n-pit 
ninenmelewe'tqin. Eres. 
Told by Ke¥ulin, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village of Mr'sqan, October. 1goo. 
9. Incantation to bri 
When a man has (just) died, (another 
person) goes into the open, while (the 
dead) is still lying in the inner room. 
That man goes out and talks to the 
Morning Daw, to the Upper Being. 
He says, “Oh, my mind is uncertain! Enough!® Whom (else) may I ask 
(for help)? You are most fi. Oh, 
give me your dog! I will also use it 
as a dog myself. 1am sorrowful for 
my child* It has gone away to a far- 
off (place). Therefore let me use that ing back the Dying. 
Ora’wéran im qol gevi”lin, fio’onté 
gelqiln nota’gu, mrikri relqu va'ma 
yep. Nrntoqén ora’wéran, Tramrge'ts, 
Girgola’gtt nuwéthau'qén, ni‘agin, * Go, 
tintinyurge’erkrn, rattan-iau’in, mi’kind 
muanla’a’k? Erre’® git éto'pel. Gu, 
gin “tn qineilhi’.  Attaw’ a¥tt 
milhra'n epte gm. Kmi‘Am gimni'n 
em ¢'lhu tilhr'rkin, ga'nqan qatr, attau’ 
Enga’n wr'yole mrlhm.” 
  (dog) for (my) assistant.”   
| That is, fetches some water, which by power small iver. 2 Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 506, No. 9, enough) means also “stop talk   
* RattanTan’hin (‘ 4 The man who utters the incantation calls the pe of incantation is considered to be transformed into a 
     
  and “stop doubting.” tient his child. (cf. Vol. VIL of this series, p. 476).     20

----

136 
He makes (a motion) with his left 
hand, as if receiving that dog (from 
somewhere). Then he (comes back 
and) blows into the ear of the dead 
person, and howls (like a dog), “Uu, 
wu!” thus. . 
Then this dog starts on, pursuing the dead man, [who has gone away.] 
It follows him, howling and barking, “Haw, haw, haw!” It passes ahead 
of him, and meets him (on the road 
with fierce) barking. It snaps at him 
(while he is) going, and intercepts his 
path in every direction. At last it 
makes him come back from his long 
journey. He must enter the body and 
put it on again. Then he begins to 
breathe, and (gradually) improves. And 
so he, though a real dead (one), revives 
again.   BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
A¥ttin wo'tqan pria’q wu'rri ni‘tqin 
fia’éhr-minga’, ninei’mitgin tm qanu’r. 
Ora’wéian vi‘ veloi'pi nine'ttugin, 
nénagola’qén: “Uu, uu!” . Enii'n:. 
Quiii fan a¥ttn  ninerkeeti'ugin 
vi*lin Enqa’n, ewkwe'tlln, Aa‘an, gaqo'- 
lema, gatautawa’reta ninerkeetiugin: 
“Gau, gau, gau!” Nénaa'lagén a'tto’ota, nenatautawa'tqén im rigaifau’ki, néna- 
pe'nigen tilelm.  Lemriko nénakav- 
rau'qen, qén'ver ganqan ninepelqin- 
tew'qin, uwi'k wo'tqan nénai‘piqen tim, 
ninere’s-qiugin. Nuwgéntogen, nime- 
lew'qin, mite"vi*hn. En'qam nei‘ugin. 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, in October, 1900. 
10. Incantation (used by) a Woman rejected 
~ of her Rival (E'wgan fic'us'qati uw: 
Then you are this woman! You 
have so much of my husband's love, 
that he begins to reject me. But you 
are not a human being. I make you 
into carrion lying on the pebbly shore, 
«— old carrion inflated (with rottenness). 
1 make my husband into a (male) 
bear. The bear comes from a distant 
land. He has been starving for a long 
time, he is very hungry. He sees the 
carrion. Seeing it, he cats of it. After 
a while he vomits it up. I make you 
into the stuff vomited. My husband sees it, and it is of no use to him. 
He rejects it on the mere seeing (of it). her Husband and Jealous titi ®'nku Irnyo).! 
    A'men dm BLOM Aeus qitigr, ¢Thu 
nelhirkinigit uwi¥quéita, mpet tm 
gim E'nku énalhbio’®’. Qareménai’- git fie'us qati-git, Ségai’-réroi pt titei’kr- 
gir, pe‘nin réroi’in’ gepe'wetin. 
Enqa'm uwa¥qué keifu titei kirk, 
qol&’notai'pti ne'me kei'fiéhrn ye'tirkin, 
penn aqamr'tvakElén, ya¥rat tm ge- 
guttelin.  Quri’i réroin lu¥rkiain, 
¢nmen luBenu runin, enmen to’ 
qaia’qa tm gre'lg’, ¢nmen gra'lirie 
geneligit, wnt uwaquéiti gite'r- 
Kinin, mifkri ra‘qalqal. Em-gitc'ti 
pai‘wake rrtémnin. 
    
+ Compare Vol. VII of this, series, p. 501, No. 12. 0

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
At the same time 1 make this body 
of mine into a young beaver that has 
just shed his hair. 1 make smooth 
every hair of mine. This woman, the 
object of (my husband's) liking, he 
leaves her, and desires me, because 
she is repugnant to look upon. 
(She spits, and with the saliva smears 
her whole body from head to foot. 
Indeed, the husband begins to have a 
liking for her) 
1, who was neglected recently, I turn 
myself towards him, I make myself into 
a deadly pain for him. Let him be 
attracted by the smell from here, and 
have a desire for me. Though I reject him, let him be still more persistent. 
And really the husband leaves off 
his former love. 137 
Giimna'n tm wo'tqan uwi'k gimain tor-irga’t-palota’ne  titeilarkmn, len gr am Zorra’tirkin; Au'ngin im fie’us qat eThu Inyo péla'nén, gimu'k tag- gadfio’®®, kimel knqa’n qol gite'k im dermiagrirgm. 
| (en'qa’m ninentinketuwe'qin.  Eni'n 
im uwik &ake'ti nénama*légén ga- 
law'tima. Qailhna’n'gét tim uw” quéiti 
lhu nine'téiqin.) 
Aigo'ongén um Enku Irnyo kime'l 
am Emkagti tmli'tkin, viyéra'éirgu wlhrrkin, venlii fa‘nko ¢ifhméu’rkin, 
Kime! ¢lhu in¢ttii®, Gim im am 
nku ulhrrkin, venlfi nrtiv'qin.    
Qailhma’n'gét nénanta’atvuqén €Thu 
Inyo.   Told by Afqa'iiia, a Maritime Chukchee woman, in the village of Ce'¢in, May, 1gor.

----

IV. — SONGS. 
1 1 
From what country is that traveller, who is being drawn by dogs? On his 
way returning he came to be without a whip. Then I will make haste 
and walk onwards. Then I will make haste and walk to the song. Truly, let us be joyful!   
A, meiko'kén maglalin atume'ti nileqin, palqantatinvé’pl eqe'néikka 
  Ab fomvbecbing twelir bye dog Meiemovng, on bs reming  viot whip raving ge'nerin? Eagan mita¥tifiok mitaivala’tiiok, Enqa’m mita¥tiiok mitai- Bebubecome! Then Dwilmekehury,  Lwill valk, ow Lill makehury, 1 wil vala'tifiok, En°qa’m mita’uiiok grapétr! Matkorgau, gu'nal wll, mow Iilmekehury to thesoog! Let us rece, inly! 
. 2 
Those from Uwe'len have been singing, 
Those from mnto'win have been swaying, 
Women have been dancing. Those from Ne'okan have been swaying, They have frightened those who sewed up the boat's cover. Those from Imi¥lin have been listening, the young men. 
Uwe'lelot gagrapta’lénat, 
Those of have been sogiog, Unelen méo wilt gilule'vinet, Those of have been swayiog, mewn Ne'us'qitti geputture’linet. Women have been dancing. 
Ne'ekalot gilule'Linet, 
Those of have been swaying, No'6kan Attvun'ni’lit gankautatau'linet, 
Those who sewed. they have frightened thes, up a boat Imi¥lilit gapalomté’lénat ora’€ekit. 
Those of have been listening, the young men. Tni¥lin   
From Qo'tirgm, at Indian Point, May, 1901. 
This song and a few of the subsequent ones belosg to the Maritime Chukehes of the villge of Uwelen, neae East Cape. 1 consider them to be merely an imitation of Eskimo songs. Half of the population of Uwellen are No'olalén Eskimo. The Chukehee of Uwelen are reputed to be, of all the Markime Chukelee, the most clever aod adventuresome. They are given to trading, snd spend much time in visiting Eskimo villages on both sides of Bering Strait, 1 wrote down the words ia May, 1901, from one Q'ticg's, an inhabitant of Uai'sak, at Indian Poiat, who was of mixed origin, half Chakehee sad half Eskimo. Neither the words nor the tunes were improvised. So, when Qotirgin would make a mistake, the other young men present would immediately correct it in chorus. Phonographic records were taken of all the following songs. 
[x38] .   
    
     
  
 

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS, 139 
3 
Whence comes this little traveller, 
This little traveller from the leeward side? 
Oh, but it is Keweute’gm! 
(His sledge is) loaded with wild reindeer-skins. 
Who is coming there from the leeward side? 
Oh, but it is Pefeute’gin! His sledge is loaded with piebald skins. 
  
A meéiiko’kén magla’liqai, Ab, from where being traveler ile, 
aiva'lhiipa magla’liqai, from the leeward traveler lide, ide 
qi quo Keweute’gm however Keweutegin 
tlve’nelhii ginesclin, with wild rein. loaded. deer skins 
A méiiko’ken aiva'Thiipd, 
Ab, from where being from the lee- ward side, 
qi qun Peieute’gin however Pepeutepn 
qe’fiu-ne’lhi gine'fielin. 
with piebrldskins loaded! 
From Qotirgm, at Indian Point, May, 1901. 
4 
Where shall I go? To the country of Eu'nmun. With what shall T come back? 
With an (American whaling) steamer. What people rejoiced? Those from 
Uwe'len rejoiced.   
Miakri Ii melqitok? Ao‘nmo-nota’gti. Ra‘qa-fiot mragtok? Where al go To Evamum ld, With whatthere shall T come ome Lelu¥tvi mra'gtok. Re'qalit korga'wka%t? Uwelelit korga‘wka't. With a I shall come ~~ Which ones. rejoiced? Those of rejoiced. 
whiskered boat home, Uwelen 
From Qu'tirgm at Indian Point, May, 1901. 
  
+ This song, as well as the preceding one, is more or less rhythmical. 
18—JESUP NORTH PACIFIC RXPED, VOL. VIL

----

140 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
5. 
O women! let us sing! 
From memory let us sing! This song let us use! — You, boys, dance!   
Ne'us'qitti, minigre’p, {'ya-fia'ial® 
  Women, let us sng! qilule'titik. Ouly from mind lew siog. Song ths  ltwwe — Bos, you be moving. 
From Qo'tirgmn, at Indian Point, May, 1901. 
62 
Let me use the tune of Utii'sak! 
From mere envy let me use it!   
Usiilin mimnya‘aa’n, em-venne'ti minya’aa’ 
That of let me use it, from mere eavy let me use Uaitsak    
From Qo'tirgm, at Indian Point, May, 1901. 
7 
Whence comes this little traveller? 
Ah, but it is one of the Maritime people. 
Oh, dear me! the poor thing! 
The little traveller, the poor thing!   
A ménko'kén magla'liqai? Ab, from where being traveller litte? 
a’ngén tim, rama’gliqai, On, my! Maritime man lite, 
ma'ngén tim, yaiva'éurgm, On, my! object of pity, 
Magla'liqai yaiva'éirgin.® Traveller lide object of pity. 
From Qo'tirgm, at Indian Point, May, 1901. 
8. 
I feel lazy, the dear little woman, the dear little bad one, the pretty little 
one, the little fat one, the scamp! 
Titeqirnfirko'n | faus-qalo*shiqai tilv-atkédilo¥chaqai, nite’fiqineqai, e‘Celiqai, 1 feel lazy! woman dear litle quite bad dear Hale, prety lide, fat lie, tine’'nenqi! 
scampt   
From Qo'tirgm at Indian Point, May, 1901.   
1 Yyacta'ia is an Eskimo refrain, without any meaning. 2 The tune of this son is Eskimo, from the village of Usisak. It was used by the singer of Uweflen “from mere avy,” as is stated in the song. 3 This song is also rhythmical.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 141 
9 
Little birds of Valqatén, (sing), “Eheheheheil®   
Valqa'zalén ga'lhaqagté, egegegegegegeil From Valquiga! litle birds, chehebebehebel! 
From Ca'plak, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village Ce'tin, May, gor. 
10. 
In the house of a woman of the Reindeer people he is cating soup with a 
small cleft spoon, and drawing in snot.   
Cautuwa’-fiaw’kl &fia’t-worwuqai‘a wilinti’fiu-ri‘lqugin. (By 8) reindeer breeder's (with 8) clefspoonTitle soot-drawiag-o-soup-eatin. 
  Song of Amu'lin, a Reindeer Chukchee man, of Telgdp tundra, written down at Mariinsky Post, March, 1901. 
Let me use the love-meeting song of Upupui’, a Telqi’p woman. Drink the 
frozen soup, food and sacrifice, belonging to a woman of the Reindeer 
people.   
Telqi'pie’win, Upupuien yagnelo'qén miya‘aa’n. Cautuwa-iawe'ti, qamé’- Telqpwomsw's,  Upspuses meting love let me we. To a reindeerbreeders food (song) ‘woman, 
ta’aronkén rélqaqétilpila’tkr. 
sacrificial soup frosen dink. 
‘Song of Afiqanukwa't, a Reindeer Chukchee man of Telqa'p tundra, written 
down at Mariinsky Post, March, 1gor. 
122 
I am Nawgo'lhin, the woman, a little female bird, clad in a woman's shaggy 
outer garment.   
Niglo-iaw-kera piéeka’lhin Nawgo'lhr-fia‘w-¢-tm. 
Staggyguoent. lide bid Nawgohin  womanaml. woman clad 
Song of Viyé'nto the Blind, a Reindeer Chukchee man, written down at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.   
! The villsge Valqa'tén lies on the Pacific shore, to the southeast of Indian Polat, lis inhabitants are Chukehee. (Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 95) 2 In this song the singer, Viy¥'ato the Blind, calls himself a woman, and even gives himself a women's ame, quite different from his real name. When sioging into the phonograph, Viy'ato worked himself up to a very high pitch, which ended in a ft of hysteria, This was because his song was a kind of wall joined with an attempt at incantation. He was wont to sing it when feeling quite low in. spirits and sad, on account of his dark and hungry life.    
 

----

142 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
13} 
By whom was I born? I was born by. the little mother. But for what was 
1 born? 
Mi’kini ganto'lén, ELaqai'a gantollen, maqam requ ganto’lén. By whom (1 was) bora, by the mother (I was) bora, but whatfor (1 was) bora.   
Shamanistic Songs. 
Halfimprovised songs of the character of the two shamanistic songs given 
below are rare among the Chukchee, and more frequent among the Eskimo. 
Both of the following songs were also recorded on the phonograph. 
The first song is that of a shaman, Nouroota’gin. He complains of the 
impudence of women and boys of the village of Cetin, who use his shaman- 
istic songs in his absence. Complaints like this are usual among the Chukchee, 
who are jealous of the tunes which they use at ceremonials or shamanistic 
performances. On the other hand, listeners to a “real shaman” (li-ene’frln) 
are inclined afterwards to appropriate his songs and tunes for their own use. 
Nouroota’gin comes to the village for his drum. Rattling on the drum, he 
talks with the kele who is underground. The ke'le will draw the offenders 
underground with his breath. 
The words of the second song are only in part Chukchee. The last two 
lines, from the word “kaiw'hruta” on, are Ai'wan Eskimo. Ei‘mui, a member 
of a mixed community, began in Chukchee, and finished in Eskimo. He 
explained that in doing so he feels more at ease. Indeed, many of the 
inhabitants of that village speak in the same way, beginning in one language 
and finishing in another. 
As to the language, I must also mention that the proper names Teé1- 
fi‘nqaid in the first song, and Wukwata’gm in the second, though used in a Chukchee connection, are not quite correct Chukchee. They should be Ce'éic 
fi'nqai’s and Wukwute’gm. The change is more or less in conformity to the 
Eskimo pronunciation of these words. Tesik is Eskimo for Ce’éin. Wukwute'gin 
is a Chukchee name, and means in Chukchee ‘rock limit” When used by 
the Eskimo, its form is Wukwata'hik. 
In the second song a shaman is described as travelling with two dogs. 
He came to a land near a large lake. A kelle of a mocking character 
caused him to have a delusion. When driving upon the ice of a certain 
small river, it seemed to him that the ice was cracked, so that he could   
1 Tagea'tirgia, named Nikon in Russian, a River Chukehee from the Middle Anadyr, who sang this song for me, was to 4 certain degree Russianized, and spoke Russian fluently. Perhaps his song bore traces of Russian inflcace, though 1 am not sure of it. The fuse was quite Chukchee in character, snd he used to sing. this song when under the influence of fy-agaric, of which he was very fond and a great consumer. The song was written down at a night camp, when travelling from the mouth of the Anadyr to Markova.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 143 
not cross. After a while, however, he saw that the crack had closed, and 
he went over and drove on. “What shall I do to that mocking spirit?” asks 
the shaman in the end. The dogs are called “tennéta’t dogs.” The word 
“tonnéta’t” has no meaning in Chukchee, and is said to be a word of the 
kel language. In Chukchee incantations and shamanistic songs I came across 
two or three more words of a similar character. They were said to belong 
to the language of the kellet, and their provenience and meaning could not 
be ascertained. On the other hand, the Asiatic Eskimo, as well as the 
American, have a whole vocabulary of words said to belong to the language 
of the spirits, and used only in incantations and at shamanistic performances. 
All these words represent cither methaphoric terms or obsolete words. Some 
of those used in Asia are derived from American Eskimo roots. 
  14. 
Nouroota'gin* was indeed just mocking me. He was coming back from 
the country of Ewnmun. He was coming home, singing, to the land of 
Cetin. His words were made the object of laughter by the men. The boys 
of Ce'éin used them all the time. The mocking women used them all the 
time. He came home for his drum. On coming home, he made the drum 
reverberate, and was called by the kels from underground. “What shall I do 
to this one? 1 shall draw him down with my breath from the bottom of the 
earth” Ayaqa, yaqw, yaqai'! I have finished, I have finished.   
Nourootagnr'yiin nigtilaulaw’qén len gomoka'gti, gara’gtilen Ao‘nmo- Nourootsgoi'yila was quite mocking just tome, was coming home from Ev/nmun 
notai’pti. Nourotagnr'yfiin tipaina‘ma gara‘gtilén, Tatei'o-nota’gti gara‘gtilen. [lng Nourotagar'yiin singing wascominghome, to Cetindand was coming home. 
We'thau ora’wéia'ta tetiigitu nrlhiqin, Tetrfingiia am-ya‘ata nrntigin Words by the men to dension are become, by Cetin boys all by using they did it 
lewlou-ac'us qth am-ya'ata nvntiqen.  Yararetr gardgtlén Cotegts, . Yaar by mockewomen All by using they did it. For a drum he has come home to Cet Drom 
genpirgirgeulin ya'ra-piiki'rik, nute’s'qak eutai’pi geifewlin: *Mi‘akri wotenqan Vehas made to catrit_ home oo coming, ground bencah hobuscalledhim: “How ths one minrnui'n, wyitifiu'ti, notas-qay¢’Agipt wiyititw'ti.”  Ayaqa’, yaga' yaqai 
I shll use, by bresih drawing, carh from the base by broth druwing®  Ayaat, yaae'  yaqat. “Tiplrtkuii*n, tiply'tkutn. Tfnished, 1 fnished. 
Written down from the words of Ei'mui, a Maritime Chukchee man, in 
the village of Ce'éin, May, 1901.   
    
Vln the original text the sugme: the noun.   ive form, which is frequently used instead of the ordinary form of

----

144 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
15. 
Just now a kelle-boy said (to his mother), “Mamma, go out and beckon 
to the little traveller. 1 want to have him for a ‘spleen-companion.’ Throw 
open the entrance! This little traveller, with two dogs, with tennéta’t dogs, 
from the country near the lake, he is indeed just mocking me.” What shall 
1 do with this fissure (in the ice)? Oh, it has closed of its own accord! I 
have gone across, truly I have gone over it. Wukwata’hin, who had no pity 
on me, how shall I act towards him, how, how, how? Thus, thus, thus. 
  
Guna rai, kele-fingai giulin, “Gund wo'ten maglaiqai, gun 1mmai’ J cow keh beside is tele ule ju mann qanto, wo'teiqan qlwa'lhn gomoka'ght émiolte'mge, gun ttl qiwge'n- Bow, Biome bekambim © tome forsplecocompanion, jut door throw tethn, gund wo'ten maglaiqai tennéta’ta¥tuiln, di'ren-a*tuln. Gr'thisqa- apm, jut this teviler like tonottwtdogs having, two dogs bavi Lake op notaiin.  Nigtmilaulaw'qén fen gomoka'gti” Mifkri mintr'n itatirgin? lod big. Que mocking one juk © to me How shall Tact by the cle Gund wo'te gat/mhilén, garma'gtilén, na‘qam lima t/rma’gtia’n. Wukwa- Ju is Lasiefcosd, hs gone ovr, but agin Dweatowr Welw ta’gm* kai'hruta naglihiwvira’tuk natrhluku  pihla’siqun, na’tin natn na‘tm win which one not pitying how wl La how how bow,   
  
qai, hwa'tin, hwa'tin hwa'tin_ qai. has, thas thus 
Written down from the words of Ei'mui, a Maritime Chukchee man, in 
the village of Ce'tin, May, 5gor. 
162 
1. Big rock, move away! I want to see Caivuurgin. 
Big hummock, move away! 1 want to see Caivu'urgm. 
2. All the people have died out, all the people have become extinct. 
Pa'rkal has a great desire for a man. Only we two shall live there. 
3. Once Yo'omqai by a cross pulling reindeer-buck cross sitting was carried. 
4. A Black-Beetle-Woman, in a crevice, which served her for a sacrificing- 
place, performed the thanksgiving ceremonial.   
1. Mai‘firia’géiiim, qire’lung! Caiva'urgin migite’sn | 
+ Mai'firia’gétim, qisultig!  Saivo'uddin migite’d'n! Greatrock big, tara sway! 
    
From here on Alwan Eskimo. 2 Taken from Bogorss, Chukehee Materials, p. 146. These songs were recorded among the Reindeer Chukehee of the Kolyms. All of them belong to women. Therefore the fit line of the Chukchee text is given according to male prosounciation (re'pit); the second, according to female pronunciation (gie'pit) J is pronounced like German 1.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 145 
Mei'fi-t'mkitim, qurolugr®! Caivu'urgm mi'gited®n. 
Mei'firtymkitim, qidulugr! Saivu'usim migite’s'n. Gresthummock, torn away! Caivurgm 1 will see. 
2. Ra‘mkthin 1milo’ nuwitkuqin, 1milo”ra'mkichin ra’mirkin. 
Sa'mkaisin milo nuwi”tkugin, 1milo’3a‘mkiSSin Sa’misSin. People the all bas died out, all people the is fnhin. 
Pa'rkala ya*rat tegge’iu ninelhiqin qla‘ul. Lien’ fi'ri-mu’ri minrtva’rkin. 
Pa'sfala ya*Sat teggeiu nine'lhaqin qla’ul. Lien: fifSa-mu'ri mmnttva’sim. By Pedal vey  indesie (he) bas mm. Only two we we shal be. 
E'nmen Yo’omqai wolv-émté’ &imfia'ta nuwolvénafia'tvagén. 
E'nmen Yo'omqai wolv-émté’ Simiiata nuwolvénaiia‘tvaqén. 
Once. Yo'omqai with (a) cross Pulling rel cross sitting was carried. [3 
Taqé-fautr'yam milhroute’s-qik pantéuku-wa'lak nimai‘gin. 
Taqe-autr’yam milhi-nute’s-qik pandéu’ku-wa'lak nimiiqi Bickel Womsa oa de mrcingplace | croneiisg 3 + 
      
+ Compare Vol. VII of this series p. 329.

----

V. — PROVERBS, RIDDLES, SAYINGS. 
The riddles contained in this section were collected among the River Chukchee living on the Middle Anadyr River. They probably arose under Russian influence. Some of them have even been translated from the Russian. On the whole, the Chukchee have no riddles. Of short productions of this kind, they have only a very few proverbs and brief sayings, some of which are given here, while others were published in my *Chukchee Materials.” They have also some so-called “comic tales,” and word-games, a few of which are given here. 
Proverbs (Va'irgu-wé'thau). 
1. Listening to a liar is like drinking warm water, one can get no satis- 
faction from it. 2. A desire to defecate is more imperious than any great officer. 3. Even a small mouse has anger. 
4 My temper is as smooth as tallow. 
5. He repented of it even to his very buttocks. 
6. A small herd is like a short lasso. 
7. To a lazy camp-assistant an old reindeer for slaughter (and food).   
1. Afra’’uttk gapalomt®la qénu’r ci'in-mi‘mli giwkudi'ti, ere alima- 
Tosliog mn © lowning (like armas © drinking, | no) suai lav'ka gi'ta. Ged being, 2. E¥lel meii-e’rmek pa’rot-va’lin. 
Excre than grestofficer  more-being. meat (is) 
3. Eqéfa'n pipr'kilhdqai gan iéna’lén. Even (o) mouse small (i) with anger. 4. Guimni'n qanu’r &'mgun tpa’lhn, My lke temper tallow. 5. Gaya’tima mite’i®. 
Together with he repented. bis buttocks 
. Te'rkin felvill ginu'r &u'mu-ta'at. Few hed lke shore. Qare"nim-te’mgeéts Inpr-qaai'fn. To luyncighbor old reindeer 
  o ~      
 Liteally, *being-words.” 
[x46]

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 147 
Riddles (Qolo’wéthau'te ¥. 
1. Once an old one with nine holes. — Man. 2. Once outside, it is coming down, down; it enters; it lies down. — 
An axe. 3. It enters from outside with clothes; it is undressed in the outer tent. — 
The alder tree 
4 An old woman is made to break wind by an angry old man. — 
Bears copulating. 5. A grassbound shoulder-blade. — A ring on the finger! 
6. 1 have four holes and only one road. — A wooden house.* 
7. 1 move along — but without trace; I cut — but draw no blood. — 
“A moving boat. 8. It is round, has an eye, is used by women. After use it is thrown 
away. — Iron scraper! 
  
1. E'nmen mpimnathin qona’émkna-pa’tirgilin. — Ora'wetan. Ome amodone  wihmioe hols. | — an. 2. E'nmen fa’rgin nelitkuqin, nelitkugin; nres-qiugin, ninltelio’qén. —     Once is bowing, it is bowing; it is entering, itis laying elf dows. — 
Allha'tt, Ase. 3. Narginoipi nre’s-qiuqin gavé'rima, Zotta’gmk mtankéttuwa’qen. — From ouside it i entering with clothes, inthe omerbouse it is uadrewed.  — Vi'rvir. Nersree? 4. Vilh-anpina’¢ha mpiae’w ninepukinvugin, — Kei'ftt qui'murkrt. By an agry old man old woman ismade tobresk winds, — Beas copulate. 5. Va"iLat-pari‘uifin. — Rilgu’kwun. 
Grass-bound shoulder-blade. — Riog (spon the finger). 
       6. Nira'n-ka'rgil-6-tim, na’qam Enne'n. til'n. — Ottira’s Wihfour balsam, but one rod Wooden hows, 7. Tilerkin, tlerkm, na'qam uid evi'n-vukd, tiévirki, tlv-uiis emu's- lammoving, Tammoring, but mo withost tce, © am cuting, quite no without iid, — Afttwila'tirgin. blood. — Moving in boa. 8. Koulokuwa'lin, enne'n-lilelin, Acus'qiti niya’aqen, niplr'tkugin, Round formed, single eyed, by woman itis wed, itis done wih, ninintitkugin. — Ena‘nvina. tis thrown away. — Irom scrapers   
Literally, *hacd words; i. «., riddles. 2 Alder-bark is peeled off and used for tanning purposes. ‘A bone of a reindeer or seal shoulder-blade bound around with grass is used in divination. 4 The River Chukehee live in wooden huts of simple construction. Each hut has a chimney, a smoke- bole, and one window. These, with the entrance, make the four holes of the riddle. Compaie Vol. VII of this ‘series, p. 180. 3 The iron blade of the scraper is round with a hole in the centre. 
19—JESUP NORTIL PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. VII.

----

148 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 
o. Its eye is poked by women; it gets angry, bites its lip, and ascends 
skyward. — The lamp.! 
10. 1 have a headache, my nose bleeds. Stop my nose bleeding! — 
Fly-agaric   
9. Nelus'qiiti niwoi'pligén, nitoi’piiqén, nénafdtnai’patqen, nuwemilgei‘vu- By womn it is eye poked, it s eye poked, it i angered, tis lipbing, qin, é¢gtr ninette’tqin. — E'ek. ward it sicends, | — Lamp.) 
10. Trlautipoutrifio’a’k, taina‘urkm, qénaifiaurka’pgutik. — Wa'paq. Thave a besdache, 1am blesding stop my nose biscding.  — Flyagarics from my aos 
Word-Games (Qéu'ré-y&lra’évuikén we'thau ¥). 
1. I raced down from a hill-top and nearly fell down. 
2. Right-hand double antler-blade reindeer-buck, left-hand double antler- 
blade reindeer-buck. 
3. A dried scar left by a reindeer-halter, an instrument (hatchet) for 
working on sledge-runners, — such eyes had the little old man. 
4. Like a she-dog with tufts of old hair on her ears, so was he in the 
foot-race. 
5. A quite young woman, in running fast, caught her boot-strings on an 
excrescence of a tree-trunk, and, stumbling over a hummock, nearly struck her 
nose against the ground.   
+. Tinopitkinoipu kithintatya'k, kime'y uptkagta’ tya'k. From hilltop 1 raced down, 2. Mran pr thu kelp ms, 8% chi-pr thu kelpa’ Em. Right (hand-dosbeanler reindeer lef (had) dosbleser bade repdser    
3. Kukwannelka- tapagundeh telanpina’chaqai. Driedscas from a (instrument for) (with such) eyes old reindeerbalter work on runmers small. 
4. Velo" kimlé'rgr-aae¥tti-réla’ta givin. Ear tafibaic © shedog in a race (so he) has been. 5. Trki-tur-fie’nin-kete/fiqi-ki nmit- pini't-tut-te'tke-fieut timkiritkina’ta Qui nengonsg on sn (se) ro (oo) ely cnght women on bam 
kithinta'ta kime’k ¢i*fiprufie’i®. 
(fastyrunsing ~~ vearly (her) nose-poked. .   
  ? When the lump burns badly, the woman pokes it (in the eye). Then when it is angry” refuses to burn brightly, it Is lifted up on the 3 The cating of fy-agaric causes, after the intoxication has passed, a violent headache, which may be assuaged by a new dose of the same drug. + Literally, *harry-tongue-competition. words.”     

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TEXTS. 149 
Short Comic Tales. 
1. Once the root of Polygonum viviparum scratched its head on the ice. 
2. Once a great raven performed the thanksgiving ceremonial in a narrow 
house, and his tendons became cramped. 
3. A little bird married the hole in the edge of a walrushide, and its 
penis was skinned.   
  
1. E'nmen e’kelhaqai gélrtkmik nileutirge'tqin. Once the roo of Ply upon the sevice was hesd sratchiog. 
or 2. E'nmen valvr'yfiin qo‘o-rak niméiqin, garmiki'mgién. Once raven big inanaow was performing he had tendons i nd 
3. Put&qalhaqai pu'ttiek niiau'naqén, gelqimervi‘nteLin. Bd ho hie maid, he ad pes ie 
of walruside

----



----

Cuukcuee Tavss. 
I. — CREATION TALES. 
1. Raven Tale? 
First Version. 
Raven and his wife live together, — the first one, not created by any 
one, Raven, the one selfcreated. The ground upon which they live is quite small, corresponding only to their wants, suficient for their place of abode. 
Moreover, there are no people on it, nor is there any other living creature, 
nothing at all, — no reindeer, no walrus, no whale, no seal, no fish, not a 
single living being. The woman says, “Ku'urkil”® — “What?” — “But we shall feel dull, being quite alone. This is an unpleasant sort of Better 
go and try to create the earth!” — “I cannot, truly" — “Indeed, you can!” 
“I assure you, I cannot!” — “Oh, welll since you cannot create the 
earth, then I, at least, shall try to create a ‘splecn-companion.’”* — “Well, 
we shall see!” said Raven. 
“I will go to sleep,” said his wife. “I shall not sleep,” said Ku'urkil. 
“I shall keep watch over you. 1 shall look and see how you are going to 
be” — “All right!” She lay down and was asleep. Ku'urkil is not asleep. 
He keeps watch, and looks on. Nothing! she is as before. His wife, of course, 
had the body of a raven, just like himself. He looked from the other side: 
the same as before. He looked from the front, and there her feet had ten 
human fingers, moving slowly. “Oh, my!” He stretches out his own feet, — 
the same ravens talons. Oh, says he, “I cannot change my body!" Then 
he looks on again, and his wife's body is already white and without feathers, 
like ours. Oh; my!” He tries to change his own body, but how can he do so? 
Although he chafes it, and pulls at the feathers, how can he do such a thing? 
The same raven's body and raven’s feathers! Again he looks at his wife. Her 
abdomen has enlarged. In her sleep she creates without any effort. He is 
frightened, and turns his face away. He is afraid to look any more. He 
    
      te tidings”). nt cpisodes, are to be met with everywhere among the Chukelee. Some were published in my ee Materials, Nos. 49-61, pp. 159, 169. At the same time some notion of the Flood is also preser s was probably borrowed from the Russian. is the name of the Raven (see Vol. VII of this series, p. 315). gia (see Vol. VIL of 2 
         
   

----

152 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
says, ‘Let me remain thus, not looking on!” After a little while he wants 
to look again, and cannot abstain any longer. Then he looked again, and, 
lo! there are already three of them. His wife was delivered in a moment. 
She brought forth male twins. Then only did she awake from her sleep. 
All three have bodies like ours, only Raven has the same raven's body. The children laugh at Raven, and ask the mother, “Mamma, what is that? — 
“It is the father.” — “Oh, the father! Indeed! Ha, ha, ha!” They come 
nearer, push him with their feet. He flies off, crying, “Qa, qa!” They laugh 
again. “What is that?” — “The father.” — “Ha, ha, ha! the father” They 
laugh all the time. The mother says, *O children! you are still foolish. You 
must speak only when you are asked to. It is better for us, the full-grown 
ones, to speak here. You must laugh only when you are permitted to. You 
have to listen and obey.” They obeyed and stopped laughing. Raven said, “There, you have created men! Now I shall go and try 
to create the carth. If I do not come back, you may say, ‘He has been 
drowned in the water, let him stay there!’ Iam going to make an attempt.” 
He flew away. First he visited all the benevolent Beings (va'irgitY), and 
asked them for advice, but nobody gave it. He asked the Dawn, — no 
advice. He asked Sunset, Evening, Mid-day, Zenith, — no answer and no 
advice. At last he came to the place where sky and ground come together. 
There, in a hollow, where the sky and the ground join, he saw a tent. It 
seemed full of men. They were making a great noise. He peeped in through 
a hole burnt by a spark, and saw a large number of naked backs. He 
jumped away, frightened, ran aside, and stood there trembling. In his fear 
he forgot all his pride in his recent intentions. 
One naked one goes out. “Oh! it seemed that we heard some one 
passing by, but where is he!” — “No, it is I’ came an answer from one 
side. “Oh, how wonderfull Who are you? — “Indeed, I am going to 
become a creator. I am Ku'urkil, the self-created one.” — “Oh, is that so?" 
“And who are you?” — “We have been created from the dust resulting from 
the friction of the sky meeting the ground. We are going to multiply and 
to become the first seed of all the peoples upon the earth. But there is no 
earth. Could not somebody create the earth for us? — Oh, I will try!” 
Raven and the man who spoke flew off together. Raven flies and defecates. 
Every piece of excrement falls upon water, grows quickly, and becomes land. 
Every piece of excrement becomes land, — the continent and islands, plenty 
of land. “Well, says Raven, “Look on, and say, is this not enough?” — 
“Not yet” answers his companion. “Still not sufficient. Also there is no 
fresh water; and the land is too even. Mountains there are none.” — “Oh,” says Raven, “shall I try again” He began to pass water. Where one drop 
falls, it becomes a lake; where a jet falls, it becomes a river. After that 
Compare Vol. VII of this series, 7. 303. 
   

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 153 
he began to defecate a very hard substance. Large pieces of that excrement 
became mountains, smaller pieces became hills. The whole earth became as 
it is now. 
Then he asks, “Well, how is it now?” The other one looked. “It seems 
still not enough. Perhaps it would have been sufficient if there had not been 
so much water. Now some day the water shall increase and submerge the 
whole land, even the mountain-tops will not be visible.” 
Oh, Raven, the good fellow, flew farther on. He strains himself to the 
utmost, creates ground, exhausts himself, and creates water for the rivers and 
lakes. “Well, now, look down! Is this not enough?” — “Perhaps it is 
enough. If a flood comes, at least the mountain-tops will remain above water. 
Yes, it is enough! Still, what shall we feed upon?” 
Oh, Raven, the good fellow, flew off, found some trecs, many of them, 
of various kinds, — birch, pine, poplar, aspen, willow, stone-pine, oak. 
He took his hatchet and began to chop. He threw the chips into the water, 
and they were carried off by" the water to the sea. When he hewed pine, 
and threw the chips into the water, they became mere walrus; when he hewed 
oak, the chips became seals. From the stone-pine the chips became polar 
bears; from small creeping black birch, however, the chips became large whales. Then also the chips from all the other trees became fish, crabs, worms, every 
kind of beings living in the sea; then, moreover, wild reindeer, foxes, bears, and all the game of the land. He created them all, and then he said, “Now 
you have food! hm!” His children, moreover, became men, and they separated 
and went in various directions. They made houses, hunted game, procured 
plenty of food, became people. Nevertheless they were all males only. 
Women there were none, and the people could not multiply. Raven began 
to think, ‘What is to be done? A small Spider-Woman (Ku'rgu-ie'ut) is 
descending from above on a very slender thread. “Who are you?” — “I am 
a Spider-Woman!” — “Oh, for what are you coming here?” — «Well, I thought, 
‘How will the people live, being only males, without females?’ Therefore 
am coming here” — “But you are too small” — “That is nothing. Look 
here!” Her abdomen enlarged, she became pregnant, and then gave birth to 
four daughters. They grew quite fast and became women. “Now, you shall see I” 
A man came, — that one who was flying around with Raven. He saw 
them, and said, “What beings are these, so like myself and at the same time 
quite different? Oh, I should like to have one of them for a companion! 
We have separated, and live singly. This is uncomfortable. 1 am dull, being 
alone. 1 want to take onc of these for a companion.” — “But perhaps it 
will starve!” — “Why should it starve? I have plenty of food. We are 
hunters, all of us. No, I will have it fed abundantly. It shall not know 
hunger at all.”   
T Compare Vol. VIL of thi 
 

----

154 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 
He took away one woman. The next day Raven went to visit them, 
made a hole in the tentcover, and peeped through. “Oh,” says he, “they 
are sleeping separately in opposite corners of the sleeping-room! Oh, that is bad! How can they multiply?” 
He called softly, “Hallo!” — “Hallo!” The man awoke and answered 
him. “Come out here! I shall enter.” He entered. The woman lay quite 
naked. He drew nearer. He inhaled the odor’ of her arm. His sharp 
beak pricked her. “Oh, oh, oh!” — “Be silent! We shall be heard” He 
pushed her legs apart and copulated with her. Then he repeated it again. 
The other one was standing outside. He felt cold, and said, *It seems to 
me that you are mocking me.” — “Now, come in! You shall know it too. 
This is the way for you to multiply.” The other one entered. The woman 
said, “It is a good thing. I should like to repeat it once more” The man answered, “I do not know how.” — “Oh, draw nearer!” He says, “Oh, 
wonderful” — “Do this way, and thus and thus” They copulated. 
Therefore girls understand earlier than boys how to copulate. In this 
manner human kind multiplied. 
Told by A¥ttinqey, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
(Second Version.) 
The Creator lived with his wife. There was nothing, no land, no mountains, 
only water and above it the sky; also a little piece of ground, just large 
enough for them to sleep on at night. Creator said to his wife, *Certainly, 
we feel downcast. We must create something to be company for us.” — 
“All right” They cach took a spade and started to dig the ground, and to 
throw it in all directions. They dug a ditch so large and deep, that all water 
flowed down to it. Only the lakes remained in deep hollows, and the rivers 
in clefts and ravines. The large ditch became the sea. After that they 
created various animals and also men. Then they went away. Only the 
Raven they forgot to create. They left on their camping-place a large outer garment (nfglon?). Raven came out from it in the nighttime. He went to 
visit the Creator. “Oh, who are you? — “I am Ku'urkil, the self-created 
one” — “How strange! Selfcreated! I thought 1 had created everything, 
and now it appears that you are of separate origin” — “Yes, yes! Iam 
Kuurkil, the self-created one.” — “All right! — Here, you, bring a few pieces 
of fly-agaric. Let him cat them, and be full of their force!” Raven ate the 
fly-agaric. “Oh, oh, I am Ku'urkill I am the son of the nrglon. I am 
Kuurkill 1 am the son of the nrglon.” — “Ab, indeed! And I believed   
1 lnstead of Kissing (compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 38). 2 A winter garmeat, loose aad broad, made of thick autumn skins of full-grown reindeer.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 155 
that you were selfcreated. And now it appears that you are the son of the 
nr'glon, you are one of mine, created by me, you liar” The end. 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
(Third Version.) 
When Raven was arranging the earth, onc time he carried in his lap 
a heap of stones. He felt fatigued, and threw down the stones one by one. 
The stones turned into islands and cliffs on the main shore. Then he set 
his stone house in the western part of Mrs-qan Bay (Holy Cross Bay) and 
crossed to Krimi (Cape Prince of Wales on the American shore). 
“Told by Val, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
2. The Hare Tale. 
In the olden time it was dark on the earth. The kelet stole the sun 
and took it away to their house. There they played ball with it. Hare said, 
“Let me get back the sun!” He climbed up on the tent of the kelet and 
looked in. They were playing ball with the sun. He dropped from above 
down into the tent. “Oh, oh! we have found a fat little hare!” — “Do not 
hurt me! I will give you plenty of oil.” — “Oh, will you? — “How many 
kettles have you? -— “Two kettles.” He kicked the sun with his toe, and 
nearly made it jump out of the venthole. Then he jumped up himself and 
almost did the same. Still he fell down again. “Oh, oh, we have found a 
fat little hare” — *Do not hurt me! I will fill you up with oil” — “Oh, 
will you” — “How many kettles have you?” — “Three kettles.” He kicked the sun, and it bounded upwards out of the venthole, shot high into the air, 
and stuck to the sky. Before this it had been loose. Then he jumped up 
himself, got out, and fled away. The kes gave chase. 
The little Hare came to the Eagle. “Oh, oh, hide me! A kele is pursuing me!” — “All right!” The Eagle hid him in his right arm-pit. Then 
the kele came. “Have you not seen my little Hare?” — “Yes, I saw him. 
He climbed upwards straight to the zenith.” — “Oh, how can I follow him 
there!” — “Well, mount upon my back, I will take you up!” 
He carried the kelz upwards. After a long while he said, “Look down 
upon the earth! What size docs it appear to be?” — “The size of a big 
lake!” — “Oh, let us fly still higher up!” They flew. Look down again! 
What size has the earth now?” — “The size of a small lake.” — “Oh, let 
us fly stil higher up! — Look down on the carth! What size has it 
now? — “The size of a spread tent-cover.” — “Oh, let us fly still higher 
up! — What size has the earth now?” — “The size of a thong-seal hide!” — 
“Oh, let us fly still higher up! — What size has the earth now?” — “The 
'20JESUF NOKTH PACIFIC ¥XPED., VOL. VIEL.

----

156 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
size of a boot-sole (made of thong-seal hide)!” — “Oh, we are drawing near 
our destination now! — What size has the earth now?” — “The size of a 
patch (on the sole)” — “Oh, we have nearly reached our destination! — 
What size has the earth now?” — “The size of a worm-hole in a reindeer- 
skin.” — “No earth, it has quite vanished.” — “Ah, ah! I am so tired! 
I have lost all my strength. I have sprained my back.” He dropped the 
kele. The kele fell down. He falls, he falls, he falls. At last he reached 
the earth, and entered the ground, head foremost, up to the waist. Then 
the Eagle said to the Hare, “Your tormentor is enfeebled. Have no fear, 
and go out! Have a look at him!” 
The Hare made a stone maul, and hurried to the kelle. The ke'le's 
legs were protruding from the ground. He hammered him with the stone 
maul upon the soles, and drove him into the ground altogether. Since that 
time the ke’let have continued to move beneath, within the ground.   
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukehee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
3. Story of Raven and Wolverene.! 
Once there lived Raven and Wolverene. Wolverene took Raven's girl 
for a daughter-in-law. They illtreated her, beat her all the time; then they 
tied her tongue with a thread, smeared her face all over with fish-roe, made her put on clothing of walrus-hide. They kept her with the dogs, and fed 
her like a dog, with bones crushed and boiled down to extract the marrow. 
She had to drink from a chamber-vessel. 
Raven's son is a shaman. One morning he awoke, and said, “Oh, I see 
my sister in a bad state! They are treating her quite badly.” — “Oh,” says the 
Raven, “then let us go and visit her!” — “All right! Go and do sol’ 
Raven came to the Wolverene's house. “You have come!” — “Yes, I have 
come. Where is the young woman?’ — “Her eyes are troubling her. She 
is sitting in the dark sleeping-room, and cannot go out” — “Oh, oh!” In 
reality, however, she was there, clad in walrushide. He did not recognize 
her. In the sleeping-room, in the dark, a young Wolverene woman was 
sitting, a daughter of their own. “Oh, oh! that female slave, the loathsome 
one! Why is she staring so at you? If she comes near you, strike her with 
a stick! She is stinking!” Indeed when she seeks to approach him, he 
strikes her with a stick. “Keep off, you stinking one!” They ate supper. 
She was given a blunt-edged knife, and could not keep up with the others. 
Her knife was almost edgeless. They say, “How slow she is, your meat- 
carver, that one who sits at your side! If she lags behind once more in   
1 This tale and the next one, though not exactly refering to the creation of the world, still belong to the Raven cycle: therefore I have placed them here.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 157 
carving meat for you, strike her again and again!” She could not carve 
with that edgeless knife. So he struck her again with a stick, nor was he 
able to recognize her. They lay down to sleep. “Let her lie at your side, 
and let her carry the chamber-vessel for you! Only you must be careful of 
her. She is given to biting in the nighttime. She always bites; such is her 
wont. If she tries to bite you, strike her again with redoubled strength!” 
They slept. And really she took the father's hand and carried it to her 
mouth, in order to make him touch her tied tongue. He started up, and cried, “Oh, oh! Really she wants to bite.” He struck her with redoubled 
force. He did not recognize his own daughter. ‘In the morning he returned 
home. One more night has passed. In the morning his son got up, and said, 
“Oh, 1 see my sister in quite a bad state!” — “Let me visit her again!” — No! This time I will visit her.” He went to the Wolverenes. *You have 
come?” — “Yes, I have come” That one clad in walrus-hide is standing near the entrance. He looked, and recognized her, being a shaman. “That 
female slave, why is she staring so at the new-comer? Beat her with a stick!” — 
“For what shall I beat her? She also is curious to know. She wants to be 
with the other people.” They ate supper. She was given the very worst knife. She could not carve meat with it. “How lazy she is! Strike her! 
She refuses to carve for you.” — “For what shall I beat her? She needs a 
proper instrument for carving.” And he gave her his own knife 
They went to sleep. She had to sleep again at his side. “Be careful! 
She bites in the nighttime.” — “Does she, eh?” — They put out the light. 
She took her brother's hand and put it into her mouth. He touched the 
string with which her tongue was tied. Then he took out another knife, a 
small one, and cut the thread. 
It was so tight, it snapped on being cut. The people awoke. “What 
snapped with such force?” — “My belt snapped.” They slept again. “Oh,” 
says he softly to his sister, “thus they are treating you!” — “Yes!” — «Well, 
to-morrow morning, when I am about going away, be near my sledge.” The 
next morning they brought his reindeer. “Why does my sister not come out 
of the sleepingroom? 1 am going, and want to see her.” There in her 
sleeping-room sits their woman, feigning illness. They entered the sleeping- 
room as if to ask her. “No, she is unwell, she cannot go out” — Tell 
her that 1 want to see her. Let her come out!” The people of the house 
entered the sleeping-room again. “No, she refuses. She cannot come out.” — 
“Oh, how false are your words! Is not this my sister standing by the 
sledge?” She jumped upon the sledge. He made the reindeer run at full speed. They cry from behind, “Oh, oh! He has carried off our female slave, 
our household woman-worker!” He made the reindeer run. So he came 
home. “There,” he says, “sce what they have done with your daughter!” — 
“Oh says the Raven, “and I did not recognize her.” The young Raven- 
 

----

158 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 
shaman called for his dog, and made him defecate. He turned the dog into 
a man, and the faces into an infant. These two he made into a father with 
a little son. They were driving a spotted-reindeer team. Bells were on the 
sledge. Everything was quite neat, but it was only a dog with its feces. 
The man drives on, singing. In the camp of the offenders they heard his 
song and the tinkling of the bells. “Oh, a good one is passing byl — a 
man from a wealthy camp.” When they drew nearer to the camp, the infant 
cried. The women felt sorry. “Oh, stay for a while! The child is crying, — 
a motherless child. Probably the mother is dead.” He came and stopped. 
“Who are you? — “We are going to the spring fair. My people are 
coming behind.” — Oh, but where is your female companion?” — She has 
been carried away by the Red Keg (Small-Pox).” — “Oh, poor little child! 
Where shall we put it” Whichever woman comes near, the infant cries 
still stronger. At last that one approached, the feigning one with the ailing 
eyes. The infant stretches out its hands toward her. “It is because her face 
has a likeness to that of its mother.” — “Well, come in!” says the woman. They entered. “If 1 am like the mother, treat me as you treated her” He 
copulated with her. Then he turned into a dog, and they remained together as dogs do. He dragged her onward over stones and roots of trees, tore 
her body all to pieces. The infant turned into faces. Only some excrement 
remained upon the bed. The end. 
Told by A¥ttiqui, a Reindeer Chukchee man, in a camp near the village of A'con, April, 1gor. 
4 Raven and Owl. 
Raven and Owl fought for a hare. Owl caught Raven by the throat 
with one of his claws. Raven cries, “Don’t you dare to eat my hare! I wish to eat it. I am the hunter,” because he is so fond of big talking. Owl 
was silent, but he clutched Raven's throat so tightly that Raven gave way. 
Owl took the hare and wanted to cat it. Then a Fox assaulted him. The 
Fox cried, *I am a great hunter! 1 kill everything, even the mouse and the 
spermophylus.” Owl was silent, and wanted to eat the hare. They fought. 
Fox bit Owl's back. He was the stronger of the two. Owl desisted and 
flew up. From mere shame he quite refused to perch again on that place. 
The silent one also was not a victor. The end. 
Told by Raa'nau, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village of Mi'sqan, April, 1gor.

----

II. — MISCELLANEOUS TALES. 
1. The Sacrifice to the Dead. 
There was a group of houses standing on the shore, — a long row of 
houses. One girl awoke early in the morning, and began to scrape skins. 
At last the sun rose, still no man left the sleeping-room. The sun mounted 
high, but nobody appeared. She says, “Where are they? 1 will go and see. What are they doing there? She looked in, and saw that all the people 
were lying down, as if asleep. They were dead, all of them. She alone, of 
the whole camp, was alive. Then she says, “What shall I do?” She went 
and carried water to all the houses, hung up the kettles, and cooked food. 
When the food was ready, she said, “There, eat!” She went home and lay 
down to sleep. As soon as she shut her eyes, she heard the voice of her 
father. She was not asleep, but only had her eyes shut. Her father was 
saying, “We are content that you have cooked food. To-morrow, when you 
get up and spend the day, do not go to sleep in the inner room, lie down 
in the outer tent. The next night take a place outside of the tent, then at 
a distance from the tent. For ten days keep moving your slecping-place 
away until you reach the herd. There remain until the snow shall fall upon 
the earth. After that come here again and bring the herd — not all of it: 
bring the lesser portion. This must be given to us.’ She slept through the 
night. In the morning she again brought water and cooked food in all ten 
houses. She went to sleep in the outer tent. The next night she slept out- 
side of the tent. Then she moved off, and at last came to the herd. The 
herdsmen asked, “What has happened?” — “All the people in the houses 
are dead” — “Oh, oh!" — We must not go home. Only when the first 
snow comes shall we go there” — “All right!" They remained with the 
herd. When snow fell and the ground was covered, they came ncarer, and 
brought the herd — one part of it: the lesser portion they brought to the 
camp. The larger part was to become their own herd in the future. They 
slaughtered the reindeer that were brought, and offered them in sacrifice. 
They also left there the houses and everything that was in them. They took 
for themselves only the things in the summer pile. They left and went away. The end. 
Told by Viyé'nto the Blind, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
[rs9)

----

160 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
2. The Re’kkedi. 
There lived once a people that were Re’kkefi! They were rich in rein 
deer and had a large herd. One of them wanted to visit men. He said to 
his wife, “Let us go toward men!” The weather was cold. The wife answered, 
“It is too cold (to travel)” He said, “That is nothing. Let us go, if we 
are really hunters! Of course, we shall leave the herd and the herdsmen here, 
also the heavy tent. We shall go alone with a light tent to visit them.” 
Then they went. The Upper Being saw their moving train of sledges, which 
was very long. He said, “Oh, how wonderful! They are again at it! They 
are exterminating mankind. The people are all the time asking me for help, 
but still they are being exterminated. Iam sorry for it. Therefore I want to 
give a lesson, at least to this one; and so I want to make his mind broader 
than it is at present” He took his staff and went away. The Re'kked and 
his wife were sleeping while on the way. He came to a covered sledge and 
lifted the cover. A little infant was sleeping there, onc year old, in a little 
cap. On the top of the cap was fastened a tassel made of human fingers. He 
touched the tassel with his staff. The fingers stuck to the staff. He drew 
the child out of the covered sledge, and took it away from there. He took 
ii to his wife. “There, I have brought it” — All right!” — “But what is to 
be done with it” — I do not know. I never had any children.” — “I had 
better go to Killer-Whale* Perhaps he knows.” Killer-Whale and his wife 
live in a big stone house. They too are childless. The Upper Being came, 
put the child near the entrance, and then went away. After a while the husband said to the wife, “I want to make water. 1 will go out” He went 
out, and saw the infant. It was still sleeping. He was very glad. He called 
to his wife, “I have found an assistant! We have an assistant! Now we 
shall not be lonesome in our old age. Let us try and raise this child” — 
“All right” The kelet are going back. They found people, killed many of them, 
and are carrying the game home. They arrived home. The tent was put 
up, and the woman started to put up the sleeping-room. The husband said, 
“I will look at the infant.” He opened the covered sledge. Only then did 
they discover that it was not there. The husband said, *Halloo!” — “Halloo 
— “Where is the ‘child? Have you carried it into the tent” — “No, it is 
in the sledge.” — “I say it is not here” — “Where is it, then? Perhaps 
the neighbors have taken it. But why should they take the infant child of 
other people? No, somebody else has played this trick upon us while we were 
sleeping. What for! Oh, oh!” 
The woman sought the shaman. He was a Raven. The Raven asked,   
Evil spirits (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 296). 2 bid, po 314. 5 Ibid, p. 323.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 161 
“Oh, oh, oh! who comes here?” — It is I. My husband sends me. He 
says, ‘I am feeling sad. Let the knowing-one come!” — “A-ta-tata, I am 
coming I” 7 
“There, you have come here!” — “Yes, I have come! What do you 
want?” — *Somebody has taken away the infant. Can you not find it? — 
“All right! 1 will try.” The Raven flew away to the house of Killer-Whale: 
“Halloo!” — “Halloo!” — “Who is there?” — “It is I. I come to fetch 
the infant.” — “You shall not have it.” — “Oh, give it back, since I come 
for it!” — “I shall not give it up.” — “Oh, you will not?" The Raven flew 
upwards, and dropped on the house a big stone pillar (pérka-wu'kwulhmn ?). 
The stone pillar rebounded. The house of Killer-Whale was too strong. 
The Raven came back, and said, “I could not do it.” — “Alas!” said the 
house-master, “if even you could not do it!” 
The next day he says again to his wife, “I am feeling sad. Go and 
bring two Winds, — West-Wind, the cold one; and East-Wind, the biting 
one” The two Wind-brothers came then. “What do you want?” — “Some- 
body has robbed me of my little infant. You are looking everywhere. Will 
you not look for it?” — “All right!” They went away. On the way they 
passed near by the house of the Upper Being. Says East-Wind, “Why are 
we passing by so? This is the Upper Being. Let us at least ask him too! 
What will he say? Halloo!” — “Hallo!” — “Well, a ke'le family have lost 
their little infant. They are living in sorrow. And we are looking for their 
child. Do you not know where it is?” — “Oh, yes! they are living in sorrow, 
and at the same time every year they go to the people and steal away so 
many! Mankind is lessening in number. Let them learn that lesson. Still 
we shall go.” 
They arrived at Killer-Whale’s house. “Halloo!" — “Halloo!” — “I came 
to get the child that I brought here lately.” — “You shall not have it.” — 
“How is it that I shall not have it, since I brought it myself? Give it 
back!” — “Ho, 1 will not. I will raise it for an assistant to myself.” — 
But how can you refuse, since you are my own creation? I gave to your 
eyes the faculty of seeing. How dare you refuse!” — “I do refuse” — 
“Oh, you refuse! — Enter, Winds!” Both winds entered Killer-Whale's 
house. It grew very cold. The Killer-Whales felt cold. Then they were 
frozen, and they died. After that he said to the Winds, “Now go out!” 
They went out. The house grew warmer, and the Killer-Whales returned to 
life again. “What now! will you give back the child?” — “Oh, yes! we 
will I” — “Then quick, make haste!” — “All right, in a moment!” — “There, 
take it, and give it to its parents” From that time the kelet stopped 
coming to this country. 
Told by Viyénto the Blind, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
V For pe'tkaptr cf. Vol. VAL of this series, p. 285. 
   

----

162 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
3. (The Reindeer-Breeder and the Ai'wan.) 
A wealthy reindeer-breeder lived on the seashore. He had no sons, but four daughters, who kept watch over the herd. He had two large herds, 
and two daughters as herdsmen in cach herd. Nearest to him lived an 
Ai'wan, in a permanent settlement, — a wicked old man, a doer of violence, — because he had five sons. He said to his eldest son, “Go and ask for one 
of the girls in marriage; and if they refuse, we will take one of their herds.” 
After a while he himself went over to his reindeer-breeding neighbor, and 
spoke thus: “Well, then, we are neighbors. For quite a long time we have 
talked to each other. You get your food from your herd, your source of 
life, and I get mine from man’s exertions” — Yes, that is so!” says the 
reindcer-breeder. “Would it not, then, be better for us to join forces? You 
could give over one of your sources of life to your daughter, and keep the 
other one for yourself” — “All right! 1 consent” — “You could wander 
with the reindeer, and some of us would help you. And the others would 
also stay on the seashore, subsisting on sea-meat. My eldest son and I — 
we should wander inland along with you, and for the summer-time we should 
come back to the seashore. If we feel dull, we might visit cach other, tasting 
new food in common.” — “All right!" said the reindcer-breeder. He listened 
to the Ai'wan’s words, and consented to act according to his offer. There- 
fore he gave his youngest daughter in marriage to the Ai'wan’s son, along 
with one herd. Spring came. The reindeer-breeder went away, and the son- 
inlaw remained behind. Then the snow melted, and summer came. The son of the Ai'wan says, “A reindecr-herd is a bad thing. I do not want it. 
I can live by hunting, killing walrus and whale. Hunting is a joyful pursuit.” Therefore with the first snow he wanted to visit the village, and went there, 
taking the herd along. When he was near the village, he cried, “Oh, tie 
up the dogs! The herd is coming!” Then the herd also, that was a little 
behind, came to the village. He said, “Let us slaughter the whole herd! 
I do not want it. Slaughter the driving-reindeer while still in harness! Let 
us eat meat!” They began slaughtering. The driving-reindeer were stabbed 
while still in harness. The ground grew all red with blood. At last they 
had enough, and cried, “Give a part of this meat to the poor, to those who 
are starving!” 
The woman was sorrowful on account of the herd. Her sistersinaw 
took her handsome clothes made of spotted fawn-skins from her. These 
clothes they put on themselves, and had her clothed in old bad hairless seal- 
skin. At last she could not suffer it any longer, and left the village by night, 
taking with her a single reindeer, onc of her own driving-team, — a single 
one, that had escaped being butchered. She led it along behind her, having

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 163 
no sledge to drive. It was midwinter, cold and dreary. Travelling was hard, 
and the snow heavy. Dawn came, and the sun rose. It grew light around 
her, though the walking was not easier than before. She moved on, leading 
her reindeer, and plodding through the snow but in reality she was ascending 
skywards along a ray of light, because the Upper Being, the Being of the 
Reindeer people, saw her and knew all about her. His compassion toward 
the reindeer was very great, because they were slaughtered; and it was his 
intention to cheer her up after her loss. So she was walking upon the ground 
under the thick-falling snow, but was moving skyward, though she did not 
notice it. She was tired and cold, since food there was none, and her clothes 
were very poor. At last the reindeer spoke in human language. It exclaimed, 
“Halloo” She answered, “Hallo!” — “You arc quite tired. Mount, at 
least, upon my back! I will carry you a little onward. I feel sorry for you.” She mounted the reindeer, and after a while felt still colder, and also more 
fatigued and hungry. The reindeer stopped, and scraped the snow with its 
hoof, as if preparing a place for camping. Then it says, “Hallo!” She 
answers, “Halloo!” — “At least, eat something! and you will be warmer.” 
She looked down, and saw upon the snow a round place scraped bare. There 
upon the ground lay something like boiled meat. She ate of it, and felt 
warm. Then she looked ahead of her, and saw a reindeer-herd. Looking 
still more attentively, she recognized the reindeer. They were those of her 
father. Some spotted ones she recognized as her own reindeer. All these 
were the sacrificed reindeer, those given away, which after that became the 
reindeer of the Upper Being. Then at last she said, “Whose reindeer are 
these? They look like the reindeer of my father, but whose camp may this 
be?” And this was the camp of the Upper Being, of the Deity of the Rein- 
deer people. The Old Being is in his house. His appearance is different 
from that of men. He has ears on his temples, a big nose, and a broad mouth across his whole face. He says to his daughter, “What kind of a 
woman is staying there on the outskirts of our camp? Why does she not 
come over here and enter? Who knows? Perhaps it is the same poor thing 
whose herd was slaughtered of late by the Ai‘wanat, the sedentary dwellers. 
1 saw how the ground grew red with blood. This was a great pity. Go 
and call her to come along” The daughter of the Upper Being came to 
the woman, and said, “Friend, why do you not come to the house? Father 
bade me call you there.” 
“Well, welll we are entering,” cried the girl. The Upper Being looked upon 
the woman and waved his hand. Even a tear rose to his eye. “Oh, then it is 
really you! Your poor herd | — But why did your father, being a reindeer-breeder, 
listen to the words of a sedentary Ai'wan? Oh, how badly they acted toward 
youl” He drew from the floor near his seat a big stopper. A round hole 
was revealed in the floor. “Here! look down!” She looked down, and there 
JESUP NORTH PACIFIC EXPED,, VOL. VIL,

----

164 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 
was her father's house. He made her descend through that hole. She 
walked along, leading her single reindeer. The reindeer spoke again, and 
said, “When you arrive home, do not accept anointing with blood from their 
reindeer.  Anoint yourself from your own reindeer!” They reached the camp 
early in the morning. The people in the tents were still slecping. She sat 
upon a sledge. She sang aloud, but did not enter the tent. Her mother 
awoke. “Oh, oh! Why is it that the herdsmen in the herd are so heedless? 
They yell their songs so loudly, that even here in the camp we cannot sleep.” 
Then she said to a second daughter, “Go out and see what it is! Why are 
they singing the tunes of that one, the deceased one For the Ai'wanat have 
said that she is dead. At the first meeting they declared that she was gone, 
and, besides, had taken all the herd. They said that the herd was visited by 
lameness, became greatly reduced, and then was gone altogether, even to the 
last reindeer. The daughter went out and looked on. Who are you, sitting 
here, clad in old sealskin? Where do you come from?" — “Where do I come from! After you gave me away to the Ai'wanat, you soon forgot me. 
You have not even thought of paying me a visit: so I have come to you 
on a visit” And really how could they have visited her, since the Ai’'wanat 
declared that she was dead? The girl rushed back into the slecping-room. 
“Oh,” says she, “she is here!” As soon as the father heard it, he jumped 
out quite naked. “Oh, oh, here you are!” They were quite glad, and 
laughed all the time. She said, “Do not bring the herd for the anointing- 
sacrifice. 1 will anoint from my own reindeer” So they lived on. 
In the mean time her recent husband, the Ai‘'wan, the old man’s son, 
the violence-doer, the slaughterer of reindeer, wanted to visit an island in the 
bay. He said, “I will go by canoe, taking my long harpoon with me, and 
maybe I shall land there and stay there for a while.” He paddled off, and 
on the way saw a whale, a very big one. He was going to throw his har- 
poon at the whale; but the whale drew a breath and pulled him in, and he 
was soon in the whale's inside, in complete darkness. Oh, it is bad there! He hardly keeps alive, slicing the whalc’s intestines with his knife, and eating 
them raw. He defecates also. The bowels of the whale are all covered with 
filth. The whale rushes from place to place. It is suffering acute pain. Its 
interior is being cut up. At last the whale died. The wind bore it away to 
the open sea. It was carried to and fro all the way around the land where 
live the Ai'wanat, and then it was stranded on the very shore where that 
reindeer breeder took up his abode. Then the Ai'wan cut through one of the 
whale’s sides with his knife, and at last got out of it. He looked before him and recognized the houses. “Well says he in his mind, “what will they do 
to me when she is dead? Anyway, I am now on firm ground.” He walked 
to the tents. Then he said to the old man, “I was swallowed by a whale, 
and now 1 have landed here. 1 said before, ‘At least, here are some strangers’

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 165 
houses, and these are our houses’ What though she was struck down by 
disease and then died, and even took along the herd with her, and it has 
been reduced by lameness and then destroyed! Notwithstanding all this, I 
am still yours, as before.” 
The old man said, “All right! Come in!" He entered the house. The 
woman concealed herself for a while. They had a meal. All at once the 
woman appeared. “Here you are, you violence-doer! You slaughtered all 
my herd quite wantonly. 1 shall also try to do violence.” They caught him, the women only, tore the clothes from his back, pinioned him. Then they cut 
off all the flesh from his bones, slice by slice. He was still alive. Gradually 
he lost his force, and died. The end. 
Told by Viyénto the Blind, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
4. (The Orphan.) 
The parents of an only daughter, being very old, are living with her. 
The daughter, who is very able-bodied, goes hunting, and brings home wild 
reindeer. At the same time she refuses all suitors. No matter how many 
suitors come, and they are many, she invites them to have a running-match. 
Leaving them behind, she says, “There is no need of them. They are bad.” 
Altogether, she is too light-footed for them. An orphan boy, clad in dog- 
skin, born from a dog-woman, lives with an old woman, and grows up very 
fast. He made a small bow. With this bow he kills small birds. With 
these birds he feeds the old woman. But every time the neighbors’ children 
meet him, they shout, “Oh, oh! it stuck in his teeth! (i. e., the meat of the 
small birds). They notice the meat sticking in his teeth, and pick it out 
from there. 
He made deadalls, caught hares, and fed the old woman. Meanwhile 
he grew up quickly, and soon became full-grown. Then he caught wild rein- 
deer. The old woman said, “When will you become a full-grown man? Begone, 
and look for a wife!” — “All right!” He came to the people with an only 
daughter. “For what do you come? — “I come looking for a bride!” — 
“It is useless. She will leave you behind.” — “No, I am able (to outrun 
her)” — “Then wait a while. She is not here. She will come in the evening.” 
In the evening she did come, and brought a reindeer-carcass. “Oh,” say the 
old people, “one more suitor has come!” — “I do not want him. Let him go 
away!” — “Why so? I have come to you with an honest heart.” — *Well, 
then, to-morrow morning we will see what sort of a man you are.” — “Very 
well! I shall win. I shall take you for a wife.” The next morning they 
awoke before daybreak. They started running. They were to mount a high 
  
* A similir tale was collected among the Kolyma Chukchee (cf. Bogoras, Chukchee Materials, p. 250).

----

166 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
hill on their way, then to come back. The girl put on her racing-dress, but 
the young man put on his armor. The girl runs far ahead, because she is very swift; but when halfway along, he began to catch up with her, this 
small orphan boy clad in dog-skin. She was tired from the exertion. Then 
he passed her, brushing her on the way with the wind from the skirt of his armor! She staggered and sat down. He said, “Eh, eh! let her rest a while! — 
1 will finish the hill alone. Yes, surely, I am able (to do it). When I show myself on the ‘top, coming back, then you begin again.” Indeed, when he 
appeared on the top, she jumped up and ran ahead. With fresh energy she 
ran very fast, but the young man ran still faster. He overtook her halfway, 
caught her in his arms, and carried her onwards. He carried her thus toward 
her house, put her into the sleeping-room, and copulated with her. So he made her his wife. The end. 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
5. (Story of Object-of-Loathing.) 
Object-of Loathing (Ekirkairgm) lives with his uncle. He stays with the 
herd. All the time he is busy with the reindeer; but his uncle chides him, 
saying, “You goodfornothing” He is alone with the herd, — the only 
herdsman. One time, while he was with the herd, some people came, driving 
reindeer. They were Wolves. They said, “We want to slaughter reindeer.” 
— “Oh, how can I do the slaughtering? I am afraid of my uncle.” — “Why 
are you afraid? This is your herd. You are the sole herdsman.” — “No! 
I am afraid!” Notwithstanding, they slaughtered reindeer, and carried them 
away on their sledges. He went home, and on the way he met a person 
clad in white skin. It was a Polar Bear. The Polar Bear said, “If you slaughter reindeer for strange people, then better go away and look for a 
wife. Over there lives a wealthy reindeer-breeder. You might try for his 
daughter.” 
Object-of-Loathing went there. He gathered a sledgeful of fuel, — a 
very large sledge, so large that he was not able to haul it along. Then the 
Wolves came, a number of them. They said, “We will attach ourselves to 
the sledge, and haul it along” So they did. “Sit down,’ they said. He 
sat down, but they trotted on. They came to the camp of the rich reindeer- 
breeder. The one clad in white skin said to him beforehand, “When they 
go to sleep, catch the youngest girl, that one in the corner.” 
They went to sleep. Then he caught the youngest girl, that one in the   
* The lower part of the Chukchee armor is similar in form to a skirt. Sometimes it hangs down more or less loose (cf. Vol. VIL of this series, p. 161). The swiftness of the young man must have been very great, since the movement of that heavy amor produced wind.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 167 
corner. She cried aloud, “Oh, oh! What is he doing? He caught me!” 
The master of the house awoke. He said, “What noise is this? You have wakened me, you scamps! This loathsome new-comer, why is he making 
trouble? — There, you, give me a stick!” He caught hold of the wooden 
handle of a scraper and rushed at those who were quarreling; but before 
he had time to strike, the whole sleeping-room filled with wolves. They 
howled all around. All the people, in utmost fear,! rushed out quite naked, 
the house-master still with a stick in his hand. They fled to the neigh- 
boring house. Meanwhile he took the girl and carried her to his home. 
The next morning the father-in-law sends for Object-of Loathing in soft and 
pleasing words: “Let him come and visit mel” The reindeer-herd was brought. 
It was a large herd. “Cut it in two!’ It was cut in halves. “There, take 
one half” Object-of Loathing took the wife and the herd. He settled separately, established his own camp, and lived there. The end. . 
Told by Rike'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariiosky Post, October, 1900. 
6. (The Visitor.) 
Two men lived as neighbors in the same camp. One had a number of 
children. They remained for a long time in the country Ve'gin, but saw no 
wild reindeer there. They were without (food). They lived on a few stray 
ptarmigan, and were nearly starving. The Reindeer people from Yelkin 
did not come there this year for pasturage: so the whole autumn they had 
no “genuine food” (i. e., reindeer-meat). They suffered from hunger, and were 
starving. Then one of the men said to the other, “Let us go and look for 
other people! Where do they dwell” They went afoot, because they had 
no dogs. The last one was eaten a long time ago. The one who had 
children, made a small covered sledge, and, together with his wife, they 
dragged it along. After a while both men said, “Let us separate! I will 
go to the right, and you go to the left” So they separated. The one who 
had children went to the left, dragging his covered sledge. It was growing 
dark. He said to his wife, “Stay here and wait for me. 1 will go a little farther on.” He put his wife and children into the covered sledge, heaped 
snow around the sledge, so that they would be warm, then he went along. 
It grew quite dark. Then he saw a herd. It was very large, and spread 
around like water, — big-antlered bucks, spotted fawns. The herdsmen asked 
him, “Where do you come from?” — “We come from afar. We lived there 
quite alone, and were nearly starved because the Reindeer people had not 
come that way.” — “Oh, oh! you are alone?” — “No, I have a family. I   
* Em-yVmgumgi, in fear before supernatural things; for instance, before spirits, the dead, etc. This is a special term for such Kind of fear.

----

168. BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
left them behind. 1 put them in a covered sledge, and heaped snow around 
it so that they would be warm.” — “Ah, ah! So they will come to-morrow!” 
— “Oh, yes! I shall bring them mysclf, dragging the sledge. It is quite 
near.” — “Oh, welll let it be to-morrow. It is too dark to go now. As 
to the houses, they are also near. You would see them from here, like 
black dots under the snow-covered cliff, if it were not too dark now. So it 
is settled for the morning. Let us go, then, to the houses!” They came to 
the camp. An old man from the front house heard them coming. “Oh, 
oh! a guest! Where do you come from? — “I come from afar. We lived 
in the country Ve'qin, and were nearly starved. So we started on foot to 
look for other people” — “Ah, ah! You there, in the outer tent! cook 
intestines, cook fat meat! We will feed the new-comer.” They ate. “Have 
you any companions?’ — “Yes, I did have. I left them behind in a covered 
sledge. 1 heaped snow around it, so that they would be warm.” — “Ob, welll It is too late now. Let it be to-morrow.” — “Yes, yes! I will bring 
them myself” — “Nay, they shall be brought with a good driving-team.” 
In the morning he drove there with the reindeer of the old man. “Hallo!” 
No answer. “Hallo!” louder than before. Then the woman heard, and 
answered, “Hallo!” — “Are you alive? — “Yes, we are; but the smallest 
one, the suckling, has died” — “Oh, oh! What can we do!” They went 
to the camp. “There, there!” A slecping-room is put up for them, and new 
bed-skins are spread on the floor. “This is your sleeping-room. You may 
live in it.” They remained in the camp. One day they went for a visit to 
a neighbor. The neighbor said to the new-comer, “Where do you live? — 
“Where can I live? 1 live with those to whom I came first.” — “Well, of 
course, they took you in, but this will last only for a time. Then the old 
man will send you away.” — “Oh, oh! What am I to do?” — “Come over 
to me! You shall be my camp-assistant.” — “Oh, oh! how can I leave? 
What can I say to them? 1 came to their camp first.” — “Well, then, if 
you want me to, I will go there myself and take you and your family away.” — “All right! Do come! Or, still better, let us go directly there, and settle 
the affair at once!” They went to the camp. The old man said, “You have come back!” — “Oh, yes! but we are going to leave. This one has come 
to take us away!” — “So! But why did you not go to him in the beginning? 
You came to me first of all. All right! Go away! Begone! Hurry up!” 
They left. A moon passed by, and a new moon rose. The neighbors 
came to settle the offence. They said, “Let us arrange a running-match! 
We will see then who is really the best man.” — “All right!” They arranged 
a running-match, and as a prize for the winner they set a fox-skin and a 
beaverskin. They started. The poor one, the pedestrian, who for a long 
time had been used to going on foot, ran along quite lightly, hardly touching 
the ground with his feet. He ran and ran; and in a short time he outran

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 169 
all the others, and vanished from view. In due time he took the hill (as 
agreed upon), and then came back. But then the others were still out of 
sight, to such an extent did he outrun them all. He waited for them some 
time, but at last felt cold and entered the slecping-room. At last they came 
far behind. All the people felt ashamed, because they were such poor runners. 
They had no desire to enter the sleeping-room; so they harnessed their 
reindeer, and attached them to the sledges. Then all the visitors left. The 
next morning the others also left. He was left quite alone, in the country. 
The end. 
Told by Rike'wgl, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
7. (The Polygamist.) 
There lived a polygamist (mim). He had two wives. By the older 
wife he had two daughters; by the younger, no children at all. Still he 
loved the younger wife best. The elder onc he did not love at all. One 
time, at a thanksgiving ceremonial, both women danced. The man with his 
drum was dancing too. He struck the older wife in the face. She grew 
angry and went away to the seashore. The ice-floe was separated from the 
shore by a narrow crack. She jumped over, although she had not even put 
on her upper garment. The ice was carried away far into the open sea, and 
at last reached another land. She landed close to a rock, which was quite 
steep. All the time she was thinking, “Oh, I have left my two daughters 
behind me! 1 made them miserable orphans. From now on they will be 
badly dressed, clad in worn-out skins, wronged by everybody.” She saw a 
man upon the rock. He was very large and tall. He was Sun-Man (Térka®- 
la’ul). His shirt had a hood. The hood was drawn over his face, and the 
sleeves were drawn over his hands. Still he was full of light, and his head 
was encircled by a halo. She said to herself, “It seems, he wants to kill me. 
All right! Let him kill me! My life is a torment to me.” He answered 
from beneath his hood, “Why should I kill you? On the contrary, I pity you. Therefore I made you come to this land of mine, for you have not 
come by accident, and still less by your own will. I led you here unbeknown 
to you” He took her hand and helped her up the rock. There she saw a 
large house. It was resplendent with light, and the sleeping-room was aglow 
with brightness. On both sides of the slecping-room there were round vessels 
filled with food. Some contained boiled meat, others were full of tallow, 
others again were filled with fermented leaves, and some were empty. He said, 
“All these are sacrificial vessels. The people gave them to me, and some who wanted to cheat me gave me empty vessels. I took everything, as I 
never refuse a sacrifice” They lived together. They brought forth a son, then two children more. After a time Sun-Man said, “Well, now, we are

----

170 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 
from different lands; and you are not homeless, you have your own native 
country. So go back to your country! Take your children along. On the 
way you shall not starve. I will procure food for you, also a shelter wherein 
to rest by night. So far I have made you secure” 
He cut small pieces from his outer tent, also from the sleeping-room, 
and from every bag of provisions. These pieces he handed over to her, and 
said, “Put them down into a mitten. Then you may go.” He made her 
descend along a sun-ray, because they were in the upper world. She thought 
it was a steep rock, but in reality it was a separate world. She came to the 
earth. Then she took those picces out of the mitten and spat upon them. 
A house was created there, standing upon the shore, not worse than that of the 
Sun-Man, with bags full of meat, and with various kinds of food. She lived 
there. Two young girls were walking on the beach, gathering seaweed. “Oh, 
oh! What girls are those? Are they not daughters of mine? How poorly clad 
they are! How thinly dressed!” She called them in, and saw that they were 
really her daughters. “Oh, oh! I am not dead. Iam your mother. I have 
come back to you!" She gave them pretty clothes of spotted fawn-skins. 
Then they went home, and she went along with them. Their step-mother 
and her husband were sitting in the sleeping-room. “Where is your seaweed?” 
The girls did not answer, as if hearing nothing. *Why do you not answer?” 
Then at last they flung the seaweed into the sleeping-room. Their step-mother sprang out. *Why do they fling things like that?” She saw their pretty 
clothes. “Where did they get such clothes? Let me follow them.” She 
followed them, and came to that house. She saw that it was very large, 
and filled with all kinds of provisions. Then she envied them that were having 
their meals in that house. The end. 
Told by Nuwa't, a Reindeer Chukchee man, in the camp near the village Mi'sqan, April, 901. 
8. (The Giant.) 
Once there lived cight brothers. Seven of them paddled off in a skin 
boat. The eighth and youngest one staid at home. He went angling. Lo'lhiln, 
the big man, passed by, and caught him up. He said, “I will carry this 
home as a toy for my children.” He carried him upod his palm, and tossed 
him over to his wife. “There, here is a toy for our children!” And at the 
same time it is a man. The children played with the living toy, and fed it with their food. So the man began to grow, attained their size, and became 
  
© 1 obtained this file in the Chukchee language from a man who from his early youth lived with the Eskimo just as much as with the Chukchee. He said that the tale is of Eskimo (Ai'wan) origin. It is dificult, Bowever, to separate folklore originally Chukchee from that of Asiatic Eskimo provenience.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 171 
a Lo'lhln. The brothers landed, and looked around for him. They could 
not find him, and called out his name. Then he came, took them up, boat 
and all, and put all this high up on a cliff. Even now they arc still there. 
Told by I'm, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
9. (Sacrifice to the Sea.) 
There lived one time a Maritime man. He had eight children. The 
youngest was a girl. One day he went to hunt walrus. A storm came up, 
and he was carried out to sea. He was tossed about and nearly drowned. 
Then he said to the sea, “Oh sea! calm yourself! Do so, that I may still 
look upon the world! I will give you the best that I have, the nearest to 
my heart, the foremost dog, the leader of the team, one with a spotted skin 
1 will give you” The sea did not calm itself. “Oh, then, my youngest daughter, unmarried, a good one, clad in spotted skins! I will give her to youl" After that the sea smoothed down. He landed on the shore. Then he went up the shore, and entered the house. All the children were with him except the daughter, who still remained on the shore. The mother came out from the house. “Oh, oh, my child! you have roughed the storm !* She was quite sad. She looked down at the ground, and said, “Yes!” — “Come in, change your clothes, put on some dry ones.” She entered, downcast, as before. Just as she changed her clothes, the father entered. He took her by the hand, took his spear, and went to the seashore. Then he turned to the sea, and said, “O sea! do not be angry. That which I promised, I give you now.” He pierced her with the spear, and left the body lying there on the shore. An abundance of blood covered the whole beach. It grew dark. She is lying on the sand lifeless. A certain man, a kind of Sea-Being (A’Aqa- va'irgin) came to her and pushed her lightly with his toe. “Halloo! Get up! Let us go home!” Then after a little while, again, “Hallo! Get up! Let us go home!” At last she awoke and sat up: *Egegegegei. I have slept quite long” He took her to his house and married her. They lived quite well and contented. They had a large reindeer-herd. The daughter, of course, did not return home. Since the father said nothing, her mother thought, “Let me go and look for her! Where may she be?” She arrived at the place. The bloodstains were on the ground, but the body had disappeared. She found and followed some footprints along the seashore. At last she came to a cli. The tracks ran upward to the very top. She climbed up, and found a settlement on the very top. Her daughter was busy scraping skins. “Oh, it is here you are staying? — “Yes.” She lived for some time with her daughter; then the daughter said, “Go and fetch father. I should like to see him also.” The old man was 
Compare Vl. VIL of this series, p. 315. 
    
22 JASUP NORTH PACIFIC EXFPED, VOL. VIL

----

172 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 
brought and pampered with food. The next morning the sea was rough again. She said to her father, “Let us go and have a look at the sea!” 
They went to the very edge of the cliff. She said to him, “Look down upon the seal How rough it is again” He looked down upon the sea. She pushed him from behind, and he fell down, broke his back, and was taken by the sea. The end. 
Told by Ai‘wan, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
10. (The Monster-Woman.) 
A man who had a wife went to hunt wild reindeer. He walked around 
all day, and could not find anything. Evening came. He felt cold. His house 
was too far away. So he thought, “Where shall I find a suitable place for 
the night? There is no fuel, nor a human dwelling.” At last he saw traces 
of a sledge. He followed these. The trail became harder. A dog barked. 
He saw an underground house. A woman is cooking seal-meat over a lamp, 
— a strangelooking woman, with one eye in her forehead and her mouth 
quite big and all awry, still a stout person, with large breasts. She said, 
“All right! Till now I have not seen a man. Now I have found a husband.” 
He thinks, “Certainly, she is plump and full-breasted, but her face looks too 
strange. 1 will not marry her.” They ate supper, then the lamp was put out. 
The woman moves toward him, he moves away. They reached the corner. 
“Sleep with me!” — “No, I refuse!” — “Yes, do sleep with me!” He listens. 
Something in her body is grinding its teeth like a dog. “I say, sleep with 
me!” — “No, I am tired. Let it be to-morrow morning” — “Well! Then 
at least louse me.” She lighted the lamp again. He loused her, and made her sleep on his lap. He thinks, “What is it in her body that grinds its 
teeth like a dog? Let me have a look at it” He looked, and saw that 
she had plenty of teeth there, as in a wolf’s mouth. Oh, oh!” says he. He crept out noisclessly. The seashore was full of stones. He took two 
stones, long and round, of just the size of the membrum virile. Then he 
went back into the sleeping-room and fell asleep. In the morning she wakened 
him. “Oh, get up! Make me a wife! Copulate with me!” — All right!” 
he says. One of the stones he put between his legs and thrust it into her 
vulva. Oh, it clashed and ground the teeth. He tore it out. Almost all 
the teeth were sticking in the stone. Then he used the other one, and drew 
it back, together with the membrane in which grew the roots of the teeth. 
Then her vulva became like any woman's. “Well,” he said, now let us try!” 
He put his own membrum in there and copulated with her one time and another. 
She became quite peaceful. He took her home and made her a houseslave. 
Told by Enmu'wgi, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the village Usi'sak, at Indian Point, May, 1gor.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES.  - 173 
11. (Reindeer-Born.) 
There was jan old man who had a large herd. He had also six sons, 
who kept watch over the herd by night and day. One day a tumor began 
to grow upon the neck of the largest buck. This tumor grew larger and larger, and after nine days it burst, and a little infant dropped down from it. 
It was a boy in a combination-suit, with a diaper, who was already walking. 
The elder son said, “This is a strange reindeer! Let us slaughter it! And 
the boy is also strange. No need of him! Let us kill him too!” The old 
man retorted, “Why do you want to kill him? Maybe he is the real master! 
of the herd. It is sinful to kill him. Also the large buck may still look 
(i. e, may sill be living)” — All right!” They took the boy home. In 
the evening there came a storm. The eldest son went to the herd for his 
night watch. The infant meanwhile exterminated the whole family. He was 
a ke'le. Then he rushed toward the herd. The herdsman heard the clattering 
of his feet, and turned back. He saw him coming, but this one did not 
notice him. He was looking only at the reindeer. Every reindeer that he 
could overtake, he would immediately swallow, and run for another one. 
“Oh,” says the herdsman, “is this the real master of the herd? he destroys 
the whole herd. Oh, the father! I should like to talk with him now.” 
Meanwhile the pursuing one was drawing nearer. He had already swal- 
lowed quite a number of reindeer. The herdsman thought, “Let me leave the herd and go away. No need of this master for me!” He left the herd 
and fled across the tundra. On the other end of the pasturedand there was 
a large tree. He climbed to the top, reached the very tip, then dropped 
from it upwards, not downwards. Thus he reached the country where dwelled 
his Being (va‘irgm), his own Sacrifice-receiving Being of his. 
He came to a camp. A single large house was standing there. A single woman was living in it, old enough, but healthy and strong. She was in 
looks similar to a young one. Men there were none. The woman was sitting 
and carefully patching one of her fur stockings. “Oh, oh! a guest!” — “Yes, Iam a guest!” — “Where do you come from” — “Oh, I came from afar. 
1 am from the people of the lower space.” — “And where is your house?” — 
“I have no house. 1 have no kinsmen. 1am tramping around aimlessly.” — 
“Well, since you have brought sacrifices to me for a long time, so that I 
have become rich through you; and, moreover, as men there are none here, 
and the house lacks a master; and since, living without a husband, I feel 
quite dull, — if you want to, you may marry me, and be master of the house.” 
He married her, and they lived on. Their herd was quite large. The woman 
was a fat one, with a large broad pelvis, good for sleeping with, a skilful 
seamstress, one who kept the whole house in the best of order. After some     
      
+ That is, the protecting-genius of the herd.

----

174 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
time, the man, however, began to feel dull. He thought of his former country, 
of the herd, the family, his father and brothers. “Oh, if I could only have 
a look upon all this!” The woman says, “Why are you so gad? What are 
you thinking about? — *Nothing,” he answered. The woman, however, said, 
“I understand you quite well. You are sad because you think, ‘Oh, if I 
could see once more my old house and family, the country and the herd! 
Well, I am not going to stand in your way. Go and visit them! I won't 
be angry with you for that!” He sprang up. “Oh, yes, yes!” She said again, “Here, take it! This is my reindeer with many legs, — a reindeer 
for flight, for an emergency. Drive it there! If anybody should pursue you, 
cut off one of its legs, and throw it away. If he should continue to pursue 
you, cut off another leg; and go on doing so until the reindeer has but four 
legs left. Then if he should still pursue you, kill the reindeer, leave it behind, 
and flee” He descended to earth directly toward his own tent. He tethered the 
reindeer, and looked into the tent through a little hole. That infant was 
sitting in the house. He made a large fire, and cut off one of his own legs. 
He roasted that over the fire. He was slicing off the roasted crust of the 
meat and swallowing it piece by piece. All at once he turned his head and 
saw the new-comer, who was looking through the hole. “Oh, oh! you have 
come!” — “Yes, I have come.” — “Well, then, come in!" — Where are 
the other people” — “They are among the herd.” Thus the ke'le deceives 
him. The man brought with him a quantity of food. They ate together. 
Oh,” says the kelg, “now I feel sleepy!” — “All right! Then let me louse 
you in your sleep!” He loused him and put him fast asleep. After that he 
looked around in the tent, and saw in the comer some old human bones. 
“Oh,” said he, “let me rather flee from here!” He took off his outer garment, 
filled it with ashes, and hung it up on a cross-pole just above the hearth. 
After that he fled. The kel awoke and again felt hunger. “Where has 
he vanished to, this one?” And he looked around, then upwards. He saw 
something big hanging down. He caught his knife, then opened his mouth, 
and threw the knife upwards at the hanging thing. But instead of fresh 
blood, a shower of ashes fell down, filled his mouth, and got into his eyes. 
“Oh,” said he, “what a samp! 1 will pursue him!” 
When he was quite near, the man cut off one leg of his reindeer and 
threw it down; while the ke'le was eating it, he fled farther on, then he cut 
off another leg; and so on till the reindeer had but four legs, as ordinary 
reindeer. The kelle again drew quite near, so he killed the reindeer. While 
the kele was eating it, he reached the tree from which he had ascended 
before, and climbed to its top. The kele came to the tree, and, instead of 
climbing it, he began to gnaw through it, and penetrated into the interior of 
it. There he was gradually ascending from below upwards.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 175 
A small bird was chirping on a bough, “Pik, pik!” — O bird! 
help me in my need! My murderer is coming upl® — “Ah, ah! Pik, 
pik!” Two big wolves are coming. They asked the bird, “What do you want?” — “Oh, oh, this’ master of mine wants help! His murderer is ap- 
proaching.” — “Where is he?” — “In the inside of the tree.” — Ah, well, 
when we shall fight with him, and the blood shall flow in streams, look care- 
fully at the color of the blood. Should the blood be red, then it is ours, 
arid you may say, I am going to die.” Should the blood be dark, then say, 
‘Ab, ah! They are killing him at last’” They penetrated into the tree, 
caught the murderer, and a fight began. Oh, what a clatter, noise, grinding 
of teeth! Then some blood oozed out. It was red. *Oh,” said he, “then 
I am going to die!” After a while a big stream of black blood rushed down, 
large as a torrent. “Oh,” said he, *I am glad! My murderer is near his 
end!” The Wolves came out, and said, “Well, we have killed your enemy 
at last.” 
He returned to his house of the upper country, and lived there with his 
wife and herd. 
  Told by Viyénto the Blind, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1goo. 
(Another Version.) 
Two people are living, a man and a wife. They bring forth children; 
but their children fare very badly, because, before having hair on their testicles, 
they die. The woman is with child and is delivered, but the children die 
onc after another. The old man says, “Oh, it is bad! I will go to the 
herd and look among the reindeer (for a remedy)” He reached the herd, 
and saw that one of the reindeerbucks had a tumor on his neck. Every 
day this tumor grows larger. At last it ripened and became quite big. Then 
it burst, and a small boy dropped out of it. The old man took him and carried him to his wife. He said to her, “Give him the breast” She suckled 
the boy, because her breasts were just with milk. He grew up soon, and 
began to go to the herd to keep watch over it. One time, coming back 
from the herd, he said, “Some of the reindeer are lost!” — “Oh, where are 
they” — “I do not know. I looked for them, but I could not find them.” 
The next day some of the reindeer were lost again. On the following day 
the same was repeated. The old man said, “Oh, it is strange! Where do 
these reindeer go? He quietly followed the son; and when they reached 
the herd, he saw that his son was destroying reindeer. He would catch a 
reindeer, put it into his mouth, and swallow it at once. The old man went 
back to his wife. He said to her, “Oh, it is very strange! Our little son 
from the reindeer-tumor is destroying the herd. He catches reindeer and

----

176 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
swallows them.” They felt afraid, and fled. On their way they met a large 
Thunder-Bird. “What do you want? — “We have fared badly. The boy 
born from a reindeer-tumor is destroying all our herd” — “Is that so? 
Well, enter here!” — “Where?” — “Here!” The Thunder-Bird opened his 
mouth. “Come in!” They entered. In the bird's interior they found a house, with a lamp and other necessaries. They lived there, and brought forth three 
sons. Thenceforward their children did not die. One time the old man said, 
“Let me go and look at our former house!” He went out and crept sofily 
towards the house. There was no house. The boy had eaten up all the 
covering from the poles. He was looking around and muttering, “Where are 
those that were destined for my food?” Oh, the old man fled, frightened! 
All at once the boy scented him. He rushed onward, following the scent. 
He came to the Thunder-Bird, and said, “Where have you put those people 
that are destined for my food?” — “They are here!” — Let them out!” — 
“No, it is shameful, since they are my guests. I cannot deliver them.” — 
“Oh, I am hungry! Which way have they taken? — “This way!" The 
Thunder-Bird opened his mouth, the ke'lr plunged in, but the Thunder-Bird 
caught him with his beak, and crushed him to pieces. “Well, come out! 
Your enemy is destroyed. ... Go home and do not grieve about your herd. 
You shall have a herd.” They went away, being five of them, together with 
their sons. The old man gathered reindeer-excrement and piled it up in one 
place. After five days he visited it. It had turned into a large herd. They 
lived, and bred reindeer. Soon they became a large settlement. All the 
time they were bringing forth children. The end. 
Told by U'ttiqui, a Reindeer Chukchee man, in a camp on the Opu'ka River, near the Koryak Frontier, February, 1901. 
12. Tale about Qolénto’. 
Near the village Nuni¥mun in a place called Ci'ni, an orphan boy lived 
with his aged grandmother. The boy was all covered with scabs, and so 
weak was he that he could hardly move about. The grandmother was unable to get much food. So they suffered great hunger. One time the boy was 
sitting alone in the slecping-room in utter darkness. Then he heard a voice, 
“Egegegegel’” A ke'lt came to him in the darkness. “Oh, I have come! 
Egegegegei'!” and still louder, “Egegegegei’” — “Ah, ah! What is coming 
there? Is the (Spirit of) Epilepsy coming?” — “No, I am not coming to 
strike you down with epilepsy. 1 come through compassion for you. Why 
are you lying thus?” — “I am unwell.” — “Oh, indeed! Have you eaten anything 
today?” — “Nothing at all” — “There, cat that!” The boy stretched out 
his hand in the darkness, and there was in it a little piece of dried meat. 
He put it into his mouth and began to chew. The meat in his mouth

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 177 
gradually grew larger. He swallowed, but still his mouth was full. He ate and ate, and his belly became full. When he wanted no more, the food 
vanished, “Well, then, go across the sea and take the pretty young wife 
from the bad murderous kes who is living there. Take your eight uncles 
as paddlers in the boat” Indeed, the grandmother had a younger brother, 
who lived in Nuna”mun, and who had eight sons. “But they will not go.” — 
“Send your grandmother to Nunimun: they will obey. Now I am going. 
Brrr"! The kells went out. He was still lying in the darkness. The old 
grandmother came home. “Oh, oh, I am so tiredl. I am hardly able to 
procure food at my age. Well, I have brought some few scraps. Here, 
cat!” — “No” — “What is the matter with you? Are you dying?” — 
“No — “Then what is the matter?” — “I have had enough.” — “What 
have you had? — Oh, cease! 1 want to send you to Nunimun, that 
you may call my eight uncle as boat-paddlers on a journey of mine.” — 
“Where are you going?” — “I am going to get the pretty young wife of 
the old ke'lk, who lives across the sea.” — “Oh, you shall not!” — “Now, 
then, I shall kill you!” The grandmother went out of the house, sat close 
by, and wept bitterly. She covered her face with her palms. “How can I 
get to Nuni”mun? It is too far for me.” While she was weeping, she was 
carried to Nuni”mun quite unawares. She looked up and said, “Is not this 
a boat-support of my father, made of whaleribs!” Then she saw her younger brother, who was working on something near his house. He gave her a 
cordial welcome. “Oh, indeed! have you come? — *Yes.” — What is the 
matter with you? Are you suffering from hunger!” — No, but my little 
grandson has ordered me to take your sons as boat-paddlers. He is going 
to bring here the young wife of a kelle from across the sea.” He did not 
say a word against this order. “Oh, hurry up! Go down to the water, get 
the skin boat ready; cause no delay!” They began to cover the frame of the boat with a skin covering. “Oh, how strange you are! Why are you 
taking old skins? You are from a family so strong in numbers. The people 
will point at you. You will be put to shame. The people will say, ‘This 
numerous family are but bad hunters, since there are no new skins on their 
boat.” They listened to his words, and took the hides of walrus newly killed. 
When everything was ready, they paddled toward the boy's place. 
The boy was lying in the inner room in utter darkness, as before. He 
was very weak, and covered all over with scabs. “Egegegegei I” and again, 
still louder, “Egegegegei’! 1 have come again!” It was the ker. “What 
are you doing?” — *I am lying down.” — “What for?” Because I am very 
lame.” Then he hears in the darkness, “Tog, tog, toq.” The kel passed 
water in a chamber-vessel. “There, take that, and wash yourself with it all   
1 The so-called moomga'tirgin (“gibbering”), a characteristic sound somewhat similar to the buzzing of a fy. Tt is supposed to be the voice of the kellr. Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 437.

----

178 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
over your body!” He took off his clothes and washed his face and his whole 
body with this urine. Then he felt of his body with his hands. Ob, it was 
sleek all over, and his hand just slid along over his skin. “There, put those 
on!" He took breeches, outer and inner ones, and put them on. There, 
also this” It was a double fur shirt. He felt of it with his hands in the 
dark. It was covered all over with tassels. The kelle gave him also a cap, 
boots, and a scarf. All these he put on. He gave him a small piece of dried meat. “Now, that is your provision for the journey. This will suffice 
for the whole crew. And here is fresh water and a strike-alight. Take this 
small parcel. When you want to rest yourself, unfold it, and then you will 
see. And this is a paddle, — the arm of a stillborn infant, along with the 
shoulder-blade. The arm is the shaft, and the shoulder-bone the blade. Now 
I am going. Brrr” The kell vanished. The uncles were coming. “Who 
is that standing there on the shore” -— “It is your nephew,” says the old 
woman. “But they say that he is quite lame.” — “It seems that he is well 
now.” As soon as they landed, he came to meet them. “Let us push off — 
“But we have no provisions, nor fresh water.” — “I have.” They pushed off. 
While paddling, they asked one another, “But where are his provisions?” Still 
they have not the heart to ask him. They paddled for a long time, and 
now were quite far from the shore. Evening came. He asked, “Are you 
hungry? — “Yes!” He took his small piece of dried meat and detached 
for each onc a tiny shred no larger than half of a human nail. They looked 
at it and thought, “Now we are starving to death. Our life is finished.” 
They began to chew. The meat grew within the mouth. They swallowed, 
but it was still there. Their bellies were quite full. At last they wanted no 
more. Then the food vanished. “Do you want a drink?” — “Yes!” He 
unfolded the parcel and threw it upon the water. It was a small skin rug. 
It turned into a little island. A small lake was in the middle of this island. 
They landed on the island, drank from the lake, and “eased themselves on 
the firm ground. After that they took their places in the boat. He took the skin rug by one edge and pulled it aside. Everything vanished. He 
rolled the parcel up and put it in its former place. The uncles paddled on. 
Night came. They felt quite exhausted. Then the boy said, “Now you may 
sleep! 1 will paddle myself” He took the infant's arm and paddled with it. 
The boat rushed forward more quickly than an American steamer (literally, 
lelu¥tvet, “whisker boat”?), more quickly than a flying bird. With such swifi- 
ness it moved onward the whole night. The next morning the other men 
awoke and took their turn in paddling; but the boat moved much more slowly, 
though there were eight of them. 
On the third day there appeared from afar the mountain-ridge near the   
+ Compare Vol. VIL of this series, p. 19.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 179 
shore. On the shore was a settlement, — a large group of jaw-bone houses. 
“Who comes here?” — “Qolénto’I” — “Where from?” “From Nuni“mun.” 
— “What for?” — “To take the ke'le's wife from him.” — “Oh, oh! do not 
speak so loud. He will hear you. How strange you are! He will hear, 
and then he will eat all of you. Better take wives here.” — Oh, the paddlers 
were frightened! “It is land. Let us land here.” — “Oh, you good-for-nothings! 
you are the cause of the delay. Paddle on.” The ke'lE was sitting on a cliff 
with his wife. He had eyes of fire, and a long tongue lolling down on his 
breast. 
“Who is coming?” — “Qolénto’.” — What for?” — “For you to eat. 
1 have come, and have brought eight companions.” Oh, he was glad! 
“Whom shall I eat first, whom shall I eat first?” — “How strange you are! 
They have paddled so long, they are quite exhausted. First give them food.” 
— “All right! Bring some whale-skin, walrus-blubber, reindeer-fat, and rein- 
deer-tenderloin. Let them eat their fill.” They ate. Now, whom shall I eat 
first, whom shall I eat first?” — ‘How strange you are! They have not 
slept. Let them rest themselves. You shall eat them to-morrow morning. 
They shall not go away, since I brought them for your food.” They slept. 
Early in the morning the kelle called out, *Qolénto’, get up! Whom shall 
1 eat first, whom shall I eat first?” Qolénto’ had a small stone. He selected 
one paddler and drew a line with this stone all over his body, from the 
crown of his head to the tip of his toes. Then he pushed him forward. 
“Here, eat him!” The kel wanted to chew, but could not do anything. 
He left him, and he rose to his feet. “Oh, he is too tough! I cannot eat 
him. Give me some one with meat more tender!” — “Then take this one!” 
But this one was also as hard as stone. He could do nothing to any of the eight. 
“Oh, is there no one who is more tender?” — “Perhaps I am. Try me!” 
As soon as the kele wanted to catch him, he struck him with the stone 
upon the head and killed him. His wife was quite young, of human origin, 
had hardly once been slept with. Qolénto’ took her for himself. She said, 
“But he has another wife, an old one. She is very bad. She will kill you.” 
— “We shall see!” — “Yes, she will, even with copulating she will kill you, 
with her vulva, which has strong teeth.” — “Oh, oh!” — “And also with 
her anus, which also has teeth.” — “Oh, oh!” 
Qolento” had a retriever! It had long hooks. He brought it along. 
A stamping of feet was heard from without, and a voice called, *Where is 
that Qolento’, the mischievous one? He has carried away other men's wives. 
He has killed my husband. There, now! let him take me, and fare as my 
husband fared.” — “All right" They entered the sleeping-room. Copulate 
with me!” The woman lay down and spread her legs apart. He took his 
      
' An implement for securing killed seals floating upon the water before they go down (cf. Vol. VII of this seriep, p. 121). 
33—JESUF NORTH PACIFIC EXPED., VOL. Vill

----

180 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
stone, still covered with her husband's blood, and shoved it into her vulva. She caught it greedily, and all her teeth stuck in it. She turned toward him 
her anus. “Copulate also into the anus!” He shoved into the anus the retriever with many hooks. All the teeth of the anus stuck into the retriever. 
She tried to chew it, but could do nothing. So at last she choked herself to death with it and was destroyed. 
He took the other woman. She was very pretty. He took also all the 
property. They came back to the settlement. No one came to meet them, 
so frightened were they. Then Qolénto’ called out, “Come out! I have 
killed him.” Oh, they rushed onward. They caught the best of their girls 
and put them into the boat for wives for the paddlers, and the girls consented 
with joy. 
They left, and went across the sea. When they were nearing Nuna“mun, 
they saw upon the cliff eight large tents. Each tent had a reindeer-herd of 
its own, two herdsmen, and a large bag of tobacco in the outer tent. “This 
is your reward for the journey.” The front house had two herds, and two 
bags of tobacco for the master. “From now on be reindeer-breeders!” So 
they left Nuna¥mun for Ci'ni, and became reindeer-breeders. They lived there. 
That is all 
Told by Nuten'qeu’, a Maritime Chukchee man from the village of Nund*‘mun, in the village of Uii'sak at Indian Point, May, 1900. 
13. (The Girl in the Stone Chest) 
There lived an old man who had an only daughter. He kept her in a 
large stone chest. Although her suitors were many, they could not do any- 
thing, since the girl was shut up in the chest. She was sitting there, with a 
lamp. She was very pretty. All the time she was sewing and preparing 
new clothes for herself. An orphan, poorly dressed, also wanted to be a 
suitor. He lost his way, however, in a storm. At last he saw a house. 
“Who is there?” — “I am here.” — “Who are you?” — “I lost my way in 
a storm.” — “Indeed” The woman returned to the sleeping-room. “He, you! 
There is meat in the storeroom Take some and eat it.” — “I will” He went to the storeroom. A Mouse-Woman come out from there, and asked 
him, “Who are you? — “I am a suitor.” — All right! I will give you 
some of my saliva. Rub that upon the stone, then you will find a nail. 
Press that nail down. The chest will open, and let you in.” 
He rubbed. The trunk opened. He saw a naked girl, who was lying 
on her back fast asleep. He pressed her down. “Ah, ah, ah!” cried the   
  
! This tale is probably borrowed. from the Russian or from the Yukaghic, or at least is strongly infizenced by the follclore of these peoples. * Va'iak (locative from ya'Tian), “ia the background of the tent, behind the sleeping-room” (cf, Vol. VII of this series, p. 178).

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 181 
girl; and the father cried from the sleeping-room, *I knew he was not a 
stray visitor, he is a suitor. — Well, then, if you have become my son-in-law, 
go and procure some good trimming for my fur-shirt collar.” “All right!” But he did not know what kind of trimming was wanted. 
He set off, and at last was out of the bright world, and entered the dark 
one. He walked in the dark, and soon heard noise and thunder. A man 
was snoring. He came nearer, and found a house as large as a mountain. 
His ears rang with the noise. He entered, however, and saw a man as big 
as a tall tree. He was asleep and snoring. He had a very long beard. 
He caught him by the beard and wound his hand twice in it. Then he 
pulled up his head and drew the pillow from under the sleeping one. He 
emptied the pillow-bag, and rummaged among the contents. He found a picce 
of wolf-skin all clotted. He put it into his bosom ; then he caught the sleeping 
man by the beard, just as before, and put his head upon the pillow. After 
that, instead of going out, he jumped up, caught hold of one of the roof-poles, 
and passed through the vent-hole to the top of the tent. There he also lay 
down to sleep, and snored too. The large one awoke. “Who is snoring 
there on top of the tent, disturbing my sound sleep so shamelessly?” He 
looked for the footprints; but all of them led only to the tent, and none led 
out. The large one was puzzled, then he lay down and snored again. Then 
the other one left. Before he returned home, he grew old. Just as he came, 
his father-in-law dropped down and died. The end. 
Told by Nikon Rute'grey, a River Chukchee man in a settlement “By the Clifs,” on the Middle Anadyr. 
14. (The Girls as Avengers.) 
There was a hunter, a very good one, the only one in the village. He 
was killing ringed seals, large thong-seals. Five brothers, doers of violence, robbed the people of their food. Two daughters of the hunter grew up, and 
said, “Our father has fed us till we are full-grown. Shall we permit him to 
be robbed any more?” They pitied their father. 
So they began to exercise, became quite strong, and at last killed the 
violence-doers, with all their kin. 
Told by Loloigm, a Maritime Chukehee man, in the village of Ce'tin, May, 1901.

----

IIL — WAR TALES! 
(Aqalle'tkin pralé, “OF those] who led war tidings”). 
1. Ma'né and Mana'qton. 
There were two brothers, Ma'né and Mana‘qton. In war times Mana'qton 
was taken captive by the Russians, and put into a dark prison. They fed 
him and gave him to drink. But he was not permitted to undress to satisfy 
his natural wants. Therefore his breeches became full of excrement, and in 
the end he could no longer move. A great Russian commander was moving 
along the shore in a large heavy boat. He went upstream. Several young 
men were walking on the shore, towing the boat. Ma'né concealed himself 
behind the bushes and watched them. They came nearer. They were making 
great efforts, because the boat was heavy; and of course they were unarmed, 
because all the arms were in the boat. When they came quite close, Ma'ne 
sprang out and attacked them. He stabbed all of them with his spear. 
They did not resist, because they were too weary from towing. When all were killed, Ma'né seized the towline. The commander was alone in the 
boat, holding the rudder. Mant tugged at the towline. “You there! 
All the arms that ‘you have in the boat! throw them into the water! Other 
wise I shall let go the tow-line!® The commander took up the rifles and 
long knives (swords), and threw them into the water. Ma'né drew the boat 
close to himself. “Why have you put my brother into the dark prison? Set 
him free!” — “All right!” says the commander. “Come to Markova!” They 
moved on, Ma'né was towing the boat all alone They came to Markova. 
The commander said, “Set Mana'qton free from prison!” 
But the Russian “transformed shaman” opposed it. He said, “I do not 
believe that you were able to tow the boat all alone; but if you really did 
do it, 1 propose a test. Two Russian men shall hold a long knife as high 
as their heads. You must jump over that knife.” They held that knife high 
over their heads. He thought, “I shall not be able to do it. I shall die. 
Still my brother is also dying. Let me try!” — “Oh, oh, oh!” He drew a 
deep breath, almost with a moan, then made a bound, and jumped over the   
+ Compare Bogoras, Chukchee Materials, Nos. 130-133 and Nos. 145-152. 2 lo explanation of this threat, the teller of the story said that the current was strong, and the boat, set free, would probably have capsized. 3 A quite similar episode is to be met in Russian tales referring to ermak, the Conqueror of Siberia. Tt was probably borrowed by the Chukehee from the Cossacks. 4 Vicks’, most probably a Russian pope, who is cquivalent here to a “transformed shaman” of the Chukehee, because his upper garment resembles a woman's robe. 
[182]   

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 183 
knife. He returned and jumped back over the knife. To and fro he kept 
jumping over the Russian knife poised on high. 
“Oh, oh!” says the Russian shaman, “You are very nimble. Bring 
Mana‘qton here!” They brought Mana’qton. He was so weak, he could not 
walk. They carried him in. They ripped open his breeches with a knife, 
washed him, and made him clean. Then he rose to his feet. Ma'né said 
to the brother, “Go to the shore!” He asked the Russians for tea and sugar 
and tobacco. They gave him nothing. He struck the shaman in the face 
and killed him. Then he fled toward the river. The Russian young men 
shot with theirs rifles, and hit him on the head. So he was killed and died 
there. The end. 
Told by ASmulm, a Reindeer Chukchee man, in a camp near the middle course of the Anadyr River, November, 1900. 
2. (Qolénto’) 
A man lived at the village of Kigini. He had two sons. The Sun- 
Chief (Tirk-c'rem) sent his men to this country. The people came to the 
man, and said, “The Sun-Chief wants one of your sons in his employ.” He 
had him for a while; then he became displeased with him, and caused his 
head to be cut off. Two years passed, and then a third year. The elder son does not come back; and of course he could not come, since his head 
had been cut off. The younger brother grew to manhood. All the time he was 
exercising, — running and jumping up with a load upon his shoulders. So 
he became quite strong, and made a spear for himself. Its point was as 
long as the blade of a paddle. The shaft was as thick as a tent-pole. In 
the spring other people came, sent by the Sun-Chief, and said to the old man, 
“The Sun-Chief wants your other son in his service.” — “I will not give him. 
I am quite old, and have no other children. And where is my first son? 
He does not appear any more.” They went away. The son said, “Why have 
you refused their request? Since my elder brother took this road, let me 
take it also. Why have you refused? Better send me along with them.” 
In due fime they came again. “The Sun-Chief wants to have your other son, 
at least as his guest” — “All right! take him!” They went away. 
On the road there lived another Sun-Chief, nearer than the first one. 
They came to him. He had a large house, strongly fortified. His daughter came 
out and immediately returned home. “A guest has come!” The father came 
out and said, “Well, now, show us your skill in fencing!” Qolénto’ began 
to brandish his spear. He brandished it, and made various passes and side- 
strokes. The sun was on the left hand, then it came over to the right hand,   
1 The Caar (cf. Vol. VIL of this series, p. 202).

----

184 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
and then was near setting. He still brandished his spear. “Oh,” said the 
Sun-Chief, “you are quite good! I want to take you for my son-in-law.” 
He was quite kind to him. So in the night he lay down with the girl and 
made her his wife. The next morning he departed, and took along the spear 
of his father-in-law, since the shaft of his own became too pliable from mere 
exercise. They came to the first Sun-Chief. He was lying on his back and 
snoring lustily. His arms and legs were spread wide apart. Near his penis 
was a small dog attached to a tying-stick. It was small and slender, but for all that watchful. Its ears pricked up at every noise, howsoever slight. 
Qolénto’ opened a window and crept through it. The dog attacked him; but he jumped upward, and the dog missed and fell down. He began to 
trample upon the dog, intending to kill it. Then the dog spoke in the manner of men, “Do not trample upon me! 
1 am ready to serve you henceforward as my master.” — “All right! then 
you must awaken this one” — “Oh, oh!” It sprang towards the sleeping 
man and bit his right hand. The man said, “How strange! This dog is 
biting his own master.” Then he saw the visitor. “Oh, it is you? Why did 
you come when I was sleeping? Did you want to attack me in my sleep? 
Come, now!” They came out. Near the houses there were a number of 
driving-sledges piled up quite high one on another. They jumped upon the 
pile and began to fight. They fought the whole day with their spears. The 
Sun-Chief grew tired. His eyes became white, and on the corners of his 
mouth there was thin foam. Then at last the young man caught him on the 
spear-point between his legs and hurled him of. He jumped after him from 
behind, and kicked him with all his might. Then he ran after him and 
jumped over him. The Sun-Chief fell down and swooned. As soon as he 
came to consciousness, he filled a pipe with tobacco and had a smoke. “Oh, 
my! but why do you deride me? Cut off my head, since you are the victor!" 
— *I will not.” — Oh, oh!" He smoked another pipe. “Enough of this! 
Kill me!” — “I will not!” — This house of mine, and all the wealth in 
this trading-hut (i. e., storehouse) of mine, you may take it all” — “I do 
not want all this” — “Oh, well, hurry up! Enough of your derision! 
Despatch me quick!” — Oh, oh! All right!” He struck him twice with 
his spear and put his eyes out. “There, you, have it!" 
All around upon staffs human heads were elevated, all of them Chukchee. 
He took them all and went away. He took along also the dog and his 
newly married wife. He led away a long train of pack-horses and of driving- 
reindeer. All were loaded with tea, tobacco, sugar, rifles, lead, ammunition, etc. 
He took all this home. They lived. The end. 
Told by Nuten'qew’, a Maritime Chukchee man from the village of Nund¥‘mun, in the village of Uni'sak, at Indian Point, May, 1900.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 185 
3. (War with the Ta'nit) 
There lived two brothers, Cinto’urgin and Afiqa’lqan. Their houses were 
very poor. Some Ta'niiit warriors came, ten in number, all driving reindeer, 
and also all ablebodied. They murdered all the people near the lake. 
Cimto’urgin and Afiga’lqan were both absent, hunting reindeer. The Ta/nviitt 
began to kill their house-mates. At that time both came back. Ten Ta'niitt 
warriors were standing side by side. The two on the ends were quite weak. 
The fifth, the middle one, was the strongest of all. The one on the left end 
said, “How shall we kill them?” That on the right end said, “Let it be by 
shooting!” The strong one said, “You are a weakling. 1 am able to bind 
them hand and foot, and then to take them alive to the Ta'niin women.” 
Anqallqan said, “We shall see!” They fought. One warrior struck 
Afiqa’lqan upon the breast with his spear. He hit his armor of thong-seal- 
hide. Afiqalqan fell down. “Ga, ga, ga!” cried all the Tami. “Not yet,” 
said Afiqallqan, “I am still alive. My hands are not bound, nor my feet 
either” Lying down, he made a thrust with his long spear. His spear-head 
was much stronger than that of the Tani. He pierced the Ta/nfimn all 
through, and killed him. His companion was still more active. Even before 
Afqa'lqan had killed his adversary, he had killed those on the right and on 
the left side, and destroyed them all. They gathered the reindeer, and took 
all the belongings of those killed. 
Then they went home, and found their house-mates half starving.! They 
slaughtered reindeer and gave their friends to cat. The next year ten other 
Tain warriors came again. Aiiqa’lqan went to meet them, driving a single 
reindeer. Then he said, *Can I save myself with the help of this single 
reindeer? 1 will rather be wholly without reindeer!” So he stabbed the 
animal with his knife. The reindeer rushed forward, broke through the Tan-fin 
file, then fell down. They fought. Afiqa’lqan killed all the Ta’niitt, but he was 
also mortally wounded by them. While he was lying there, Kere'tkun® came 
to him and said, “I am sorry for you! I may bring you back to life!” — “Do 
it” said the corpse. “If you will promise to follow my orders, I will make 
you alive, as before.” — “I promise to do so.” — “Then listen! A Ta'n‘am 
will pass by, driving a reindeerteam. That is the object of your thanksgiving 
ceremonial. Over him and his reindeer carefully celebrate it!” — “All right!” He made him alive. A Ta/nfiin passed by, driving a reindeer-team. He struck him with a spear and killed him, and carried the body home. Upon this, he celebrated the thanksgiving ceremonial. His head was the object of the cere- monial, and also his two reindeer. Thus he was restored to life. The end. 
Told by Pafia’nto, a Maritime Chukchee man, at Mariinsky Post, October, 1900. 
© From what was old before, one would suppose that the fight was near the houses. Discrepancies of this kind ace not rare in Chukehee storics. 2 Benevoleat spirit (cf. Vol. VIL of this series, p. 316).  

----

IV. TALES OF RUSSIANIZED NATIVES. 
1. (Sea-Jumper.) 
There were an old man and an old woman. They had two sons. The 
elder son wanted to sharpen his knife. In doing this he broke the whetstone. 
Then his father was angered, and beat him with a spear-shaft so long and 
violently, that the spear-shafi became all broken. The son cried, and then 
made a bow and a blunt arrow for his younger brother. He finished them 
and gave them to his brother, and then said, “When you yearn for me, shoot 
this arrow from the bow.” He went away, and was scen no more. In due 
time, evening came. Then the young boy began to cry. His father asked, 
“Why are you crying?” He said, “I am yearning for my elder brother. 
My elder brother said, ‘I am going far away. I shall never come back to 
you” The old man said to his wife, “Bring me my boots!” She gave him 
his boots. He put them on and went in pursuit of his son. The young man, 
however, was far ahead. He passed through the woods, and came to the 
open tundra, being still ahead. The old man climbed the last larch-tree on 
the forest-border, and then saw on the horizon a small streamlet of breath. 
This was the breath of his son. Then he called at the top of his voice, 
“Oh, my son, come back, come back! If you do not want to come back, 
then at least stop for a while and listen to my words” The son stopped and listened. The old man continued, “You will go across the tundra and 
come to the sca. Then you will go across the sea. The ice will break 
around you. Then you will jump from ‘one ice-floe to another. Thus jumping, you will reach the other shore. Your strength will be wholly exhausted. The 
last icefloe will emerge from the black waters. You must try somehow to 
jump to this icefloe. Then you must say, ‘O ice-floe! carry me on to the   
? This and the following stories were collected among the Russianized. natives on the Lower Kolyma and on the Anadyr River. They were pointed out as being of Chukchee provenience; and, indeed, their whole character is Chakehe, and some of the episodes appear also in other tales collected among the Chukehee. Some of them were written down at my request by the natives who could write in Russian, aso by Kussian cossacks from the words of the oatives. These were afterwards sent or given to me. Those that 1 give here Bad a special title as Chukchee tales. For these reasons I thought it advisable (0 place these few tales in the Chukchee series. Though some of the episodes of this tale are Chukchee up 10 the reindes   
     the forest border and supporting themselves by hunting lsnd-game. picking of berries by the women, travelling in canoes, the hunting of moulted geese by men, also in canoes. These details do not beloog to the Chukchee Ife. The Maritime Chukchee live beyond the forest-border, and the Reindeer Chukehee go for the summer to the tundra. They have no wooden canoes of the river type, nor have they much Gime in summer to hunt moulted geese of to pick berries. On the contrary, these details are very characteristic of the Yukaghic or the Chuvantsy River population, both Russianized and in their primitive condition.    
    [86]

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 187 
land!" You will come to firm ground safe and sound. Then walk up-shore; 
and whatever you meet on your way, even if it is a snow-bunting (Passorina 
nivalis), you must kill. It will serve you as food. Or if it be a white wagtail 
(Motacilla alba), you must kill it too. It will serve you as food. Also you 
must not be afraid if the reindeer on the shore should speak in the manner 
of men.” 
The young man listened to all these words, then continued on his way. 
He came to the sea, and went across. The ice began to break around him. 
He jumped from one ice-loc to another, and at last he was quite exhausted. 
Then from the black waters appeared the last ice-loe. He jumped on to it. 
This icefloe drifted nearer and nearer the shore. At last it reached dry land. 
He came to the land and made a fire. Over this fire be hung his wet clothes 
to dry a litle. He was lying by this fire, when all at once a snow-bunting 
fluttered by. He grasped his bow and killed the snow-bunting. Then he 
plucked it, and put it on a wooden spit over the fire to roast. When it was 
quite done, he saw that only a little dried skin was left on the spit. He 
threw it away, and said, “What else could I expect from a roasted bunting?” 
Then the words of his father came to his mind. He picked it up and tried 
to eat of it; and, lo! there was on the spit a brisket of a wild sheep, so fat 
that it trembled all over. He ate bountifully and lay down to rest. Then 
a wagtail passed by. He caught up his bow and killed the wagtail. He plucked it and put it on the spit over the fire to roast. Meanwhile he slept. 
When he awoke again, he saw on the spit only a little dried skin. He threw 
it away, and said again, “What else could I expect from a mere wagtail? 
It is not a thing for eating.” Then the words of his father came to his mind, and he tried to eat of it. And a heavy tenderloin of a wild sheep was on 
the spit, all trembling with fat. 
He rested himself, and dried his clothes. Then he continued on his way. After a while he heard human voices talking. It was as if some girls were 
talking among themselves. One said, “O sister! where did you leave your 
scraping-board?* The other answered, “I left it on this mountain-ridge.” Then 
she asked, in her turn, “And where did you leave your work-bag?® — *I 
left it under yonder rock.” He crouched down and waited for the speakers; 
but it was a herd of wild reindeer-does. He picked out for himself a good 
fat doe, and shot an arrow toward her. Oh, she jumped up! “It pains me 
in the left side! Oh, it pains me in the left side!” He shot again, and 
killed the doe; then he skinned it, and the fattest meat he selected and hung 
in the sun to dry a little. Thus he prepared a good load of dried meat, 
just as much as he could carry. He took it on his shoulders and continued 
his walk. In due time his bag grew less heavy. When most of it had been 
consumed, he again heard people talking. These were men’s voices. One 
said, *O brother! where did you leave your bow? — “I left it there, beyond 
24JESUP NORTH FACIFIC EXPED, VOL. VIL

----

188 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
this hill” — “And where did you leave your quiver?” — “I left it there, 
down in the valley” He crouched down, watching the speakers, and it 
was a herd of reindeer-bucks. He picked out a fat buck and shot at him. 
Oh, he jumped up! “It pains me in the left side, it pains me in the left 
side!” He shot once more and killed the buck. Then he skinned it, and 
the best meat he dried in the sun. He made a good load for himself, and 
went on farther all along the seacoast. At last he came to a river. He 
found no means of crossing the river; so he walked up the river, looking for 
a place to wade across. After a while he saw on the river-bank a boat made 
of planks, and a canoe made of a hollowed tree-trunk. These belonged to 
two girls who were picking berries. One was the daughter of a man, and 
the other the daughter of a Raven, who both lived in the same village. 
The boat of the human girl was full of clean berries. The canoe of the 
Raven girl contained berries mixed with leaves and boughs. He ate largely 
of the clean berries from the boat. Then he put his whole load of meat 
into this boat. In the canoe of the Raven girl he put only a little meat and a few pieces of fat. The Raven girl saw it from the top of a tree. She said, “O sister! The SeaJumper has come! Which of us two is he going to take for his wife? Let us go home immediately!” They ran toward their boats. The Raven girl said, “O sister! have you found anything in your boat?” — “Nothing at all,” said the human girl. “Then he is going to marry me,” said the Raven girl, “because he put some meat and some fat into my canoe.” They paddled home. The other one followed along the shore. After 
some time he saw houses on his side of the river. The Sea-Jumper saw the 
house of a man, and entered it. The man had three sons and one daughter. 
The daughter took a white skin and spread it near herself, and told the suitor to take his place upon it. The Raven girl came too, and took a scat upon this white skin, close to the man. Then they pushed her out. “Begone from here, you diarrheea incarnate! You will make this whole house of ours dirty.” The Raven girl went away. He married the human girl, and they lived together. 
Then the Raven began to think in what way he could best avenge the wrong of his daughter. So he said to the man’s sonndaw, “Come, let us 
go hunt moulting birds!” The other one said, “How can I go? I have no 
canoe” His father-in-law said, “Here is a canoe! Take it, and go with him! 
He wants to have a hunting-match with you” They went after the birds. 
Wherever they found a flock of geese, the man’s son-in-law would kill the largest, the most nimble adult geese. The Raven killed only goslings, and even ducklings. The man’s son-inlaw soon filled his whole canoe with geese; the Raven had but a few. Then they went home. The Sea-Jumper came 
home first, and they carried all the geese into the house. The Raven came after a while. His house-mates started to carry his few goslings into their

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 189 
house. They carried them there, and then took them back to the canoe, so 
that they might carry them again. In this manner they were occupied until 
late into the night. This was a device of the Raven girl. The human 
people plucked their birds and threw the feathers out of the house. In the 
night-time the Raven girl and her mother gathered all the feathers and carried them to their own house. In the morning the Raven boasted, “Oh, the man's 
son-in-law is a mere good for nothing! See how many birds I have brought! 
There are the feathers near my house. And he hardly had enough to feed 
upon during the hunt. Such a good-for-nothing I should not take for a son- 
inlaw” The man, his neighbor, said nothing, because he knew the truth. 
Then he said to his son-in-law, “You have your own father and mother. It 
is time you were off to your own country.” — “All right!” said the young 
man. “Ii the morning I will prepare for the journey.” He awoke in the 
morning and heard a noise near the house, like the sound of a storm. He 
went out and saw a reindeer-herd, quite numerous. The father-in-law gave 
these reindeer to him and to his wife to travel with on their journey home. 
They went away. He went far ahead, as was his wont, and said to the 
woman, “You go with the herd to such and such a rock. There you may 
stay this night” She reached the rock indicated, scraped the snow, and 
erected her tent. Then she saw that she had no fire. She threw herself 
upon the ground, turned into a she-wolf, and ran home to fetch a fire-brand. 
He came home, and saw that she had the meat all cooked. Then he began to ask himself, “How is that? I have the strike-alight with me. Where 
could she have gotten fire?” The night passed. The husband said nothing. The next morning they started again on their journey. After a long stretch, 
when it was past noon, he said, “You must reach yonder rock. There 
you may stay for the night” She came to the rock, scraped the snow, 
and erected her tent. Then she saw that she had no fire, because her hus- 
band took the strike-alight along with him. She threw herself upon the 
ground, turned into a shewolf, and ran home to fetch the fire. When her husband came home, the meat was already cooked. Then her husband felt annoyed, and asked himsclf, “Where may she get fire? Perhaps somebody comes here!” The next morning he said, “Now we are coming to the sea. You must go for a while across the sea. Then you may stop for a night.” He went ahead of her, hid himself on the way, and watched her coming. She came to that place, scraped the snow, and crected her tent. Then, as before, she turned into a she-wolf and ran home to fetch the fire. She caught a firebrand and started back. “Ob,” said the man, “I do not want her! In course of time she will kill me.” So he drew an arrow and shot at her. She dropped the firebrand and hurried away. She refused to go on with him, and returned to her parents; and all the reindeer followed her. He walked onward, and at last came to his country. His father said, “Where

----

190 . BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
is your wife?” The son replied, “I was afraid she would eat me in course 
of time, so I tried to kill her, and she fled home, and all the reindeer followed 
her” His father said, “You must go back! Your mother was like that; but 
when T brought her here, all this vanished quite soon. 1 brought your mother 
from that very country.” So the SeaJumper went back. He came to the 
house of that man, and took a place near his bride; but she jumped up and 
ran away. She said, “What are you coming for? You wanted to kill me.” 
Then her brother, the eldest one, said, “Never mind! It was all my doing. I wanted to sec you again. Therefore I influenced him so, that he wanted 
to kill you. I wanted you to come back once more. Otherwise I should not 
have seen you any more” This brother was a great shaman. Then she 
relented, and allowed him to come near. They passed one night there, and 
then went away. From this time on, whatever she might do, he would not 
care. Let her tum into a she-wolf and fetch fire, he would not watch her. 
They came to his father, and lived there. 
Told by Theodosia, a Russianized Yukaghir woman, in the village of “Two Brooks” on the Large Anti, 190s. 
2. (Reindeer-Born.) 
There lived a man who had one son. This son was all the time with 
the reindecr-herd. One time he came to the herd and saw that onc reindeer- 
doe had an abscess on her ear. The night passed. The next morning he 
went to his father and said, “O father! a doe of ours has a very strange 
abscess on her ear. It is better that we kill her.” The father said, *How 
foolishly you talk! Let her bel” The next evening he saw that the reindeer- 
doe was lying on the ground. The third evening he came, he heard a small 
infant crying. It was Reindeer-Born. He sped home. “O father! I told you 
we had better kill her. Now a little infant is crying there, Reindeer-Born.” 
The father scolded him: “Go and bring it here!” The infant was so heavy, 
he was hardly able to carry it home. “Now you may nurse it, if you want to” In three days the infant walked about and grew to be a boy. On the 
fourth day the boy wanted to go to the reindeer-herd. The young man did 
not want to take him. Then the father blamed him. “You must take him 
for an assistant herdsman” He took him along when going to the herd. 
Then the boy said, “You watch the herd on this side, and I will watch it 
on that side.” As soon as cvening came, the boy said, “Oh, let my mouth 
open!” and his mouth opened; “O reindeer! enter my mouth,” and the rein- 
deer entered his mouth. The next morning several reindeer were missing. 
The brother asked, “What has happened to those reindeer?” The boy said, 
“Wolves have attacked them and driven them away.” — “Then why are no 
traces of wolves to be seen on the snow?

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 191 
They came home. The young man said again, “Let us kill him! He 
will destroy the whole herd.” The father blamed him. “It is because you are 
a bad herdsman, that the wolves come and destroy our reindeer.” They went 
again toward the herd. The boy said, “Let me watch on this end, and you 
on that!” As soon as evening came, the boy said, “Oh, you, my mouth, open!” and the mouth opened; “Oh, you, reindeer, enter my mouth!” and 
they entered. 
The next morning the young man asked again, “What has happened to 
those reindeer?” The boy said, as before, “The wolves came and drove them 
away.” — “Then why are no wolves’ tracks to be scen on the snow? 1 think 
that you ate them yourself” They came home. The young man said to his 
parents, “I told you before that he destroys the herd. Now I shall leave 
you and go away. Otherwise he will eat me also.” He ran away, and kept 
running throughout the night. In the morning he walked on more slowly. 
After a while he saw a house. Near that house, upon the supports, carcasses 
of men were hanging, fastened there by the hair. A woman came out and 
called with great joy, “Oh, oh! a man, a guest!” She sprang to the support 
and drew down one human carcass. “What are you going to do with it?” — 
“I am going to cook it for you” — “Oh, horrors! we do not eat food like 
that!” She bounced off, and in a few moments brought to the house a large 
reindeerherd. She slaughtered one reindeer, which was very fat. Then she took the carcass into the house. “Take care!” said the man, “do not cook 
this clean food in that kettle of yours!” She threw the kettle away, and 
took another one, which was quite new. Then he ate. Night came: they 
were going to sleep. The woman said, “I wish you would’ marry me!” He 
answered, “When you cease to feed on things like these, then I will marry 
you” — “All right!” said the woman, ‘marry me, and I will eat and drink 
as you may order” So he married her and copulated with her. Every day 
she would go out. The next morning, when she left, he began to cry bitterly. 
In the evening she asked, “What is the reason that you cried so bitterly 
after I left?” — “The stunted willow whipped me,” said the young man. Oh, 
the woman sprang out of the house, and beat at the bushes with an iron 
panshovel. “How dared you to whip my husband? — “We did nothing,” 
said the bushes. He cried when thinking of his father and mother.’   
Told by Mary Alin, a Russianized Chuvantzy woman, in the village of Markova on the Anadyr River, December, 190s.   
* This tale was left unfioished. The narrator knew no more. Tales with similar episodes were collected also amoog the Chukehe on the Kolyma and on the Pacific (see p. 173).

----

192 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
3. (Hare Story.) 
There was a Hare. He lived with his wife. They had no children. 
The Hare said to his wife, “O wife! I am going now to the Man-Slayer 
to see what he is doing.” He attached his reindeer to the sledge and went away. After a while he saw a large reindeer-herd. It was that of the Man- 
Slayer. Man-Slayer was working near his house, making a sledge. The 
Hare came, and said, ‘How are you, Man-Slayer?” — Man-Slayer said, “I 
am well. Come into my house, and tell my wife that she is to kill you and 
to cook your meat, and I will come in to eat it” The Hare said, “I cannot 
find the entrance” Man-Slayer grew angry, and aimed a blow at him with 
his hatchet. The Hare was frightened, and ran into the house. 
He looked around, and saw that the entrance was no longer there, only 
the venthole overhead. He jumped up, but could not reach the venthole, 
and fell back to the ground. The wife of Man-Slayer called to her children, 
“Here is a Hare! Bring me my knife!” The Hare was frightened, and said, 
“Well, now, grandmother, do not kill me so soon! Better tie me to a long 
line! 1am so fat, I will try and jump about. Then my meat will be more 
to your taste” The old woman did so, — tied him to a long line. Mean- 
while she prepared her kettle. The Hare gathered his forces, and again 
jumped up toward the venthole, but again he could not reach the vent-hole. Then he said, “O grandmother! how many dishes have you in your house?” 
She said, “I have three dishes” — “Oh,” said the Hare, my meat will be 
too much for these three dishes.” He jumped again, but could not reach the 
vent-hole. Then he said again, “O grandmother | how many dishes have you 
in your house” She said, “Four dishes.” — “Oh, my meat will be too 
much for these four dishes.” Then he jumped again directly through the 
vent-hole, bit off the line, and ran away. The old woman saw it, and called, 
“0 old man! catch the Hare!” The old man went in pursuit of the Hare. 
He caught the Hare, and was going to kill him. The Hare said, “Oh, well, 
grandfather, do not kill me so soon! I want first to say good-by to the Sun. 
Then I shall ask something of you; and at the same time you may sharpen 
your hatchet!” 
Man-Slayer began to sharpen his hatchet. The Hare said to him, “What 
month is coming now? Man-Slayer said, “I do not know. If you know, 
tell me about it” The Hare said, “It is the month of wild geese, when the 
wild geese are coming here again” — “Is that so” — “Yes, it is! And 
look there! Some wild geese are passing there on high” — “Where are they?” — “Here, directly overhead!” Man-Slayer raised his head, and the 
Hare snatched his hatchet away, and struck him on the neck. Man-Slayer   
+ This tale is almost identical with the one found on p. 155, which was callected among the Anadyr Chukehee.

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 193 
fell down. The Hare cut his body into pieces and filled a large bag. Then 
he mounted to the roof of the house and threw the bag down the vent-hole. 
“Here, old woman! cook this Hare!” The wife rejoiced, and fell to dressing 
the meat. The children were skipping about. One said, “Give me the 
liver” The other said, “Give me the kidney!" She distributed the pieces; 
but as soon as one smelled of his picce, he threw it away. 
The mother grew angry, and asked, “Why do you throw the pieces 
away? They said, “Well, this meat has a smell of our father.” She smelled 
of the meat herself, and cried aloud. Then she rushed out, but the Hare 
was gone. She gave pursuit. The Hare saw her, and looked for a hiding- 
hole. There was none. Then he saw an eaglenest on the top of a larch- 
tree. The Eagle-Woman put on a woman's combination-suit, descended to 
the ground from her nest, and was going to work at a wooden dish. The 
Hare came to her, and implored, “O Eagle! hide me in your wide breeches!” 
The Eagle took off her combination-suit, hid the Hare in it, and put it on 
the ground. She put the dish over it, and sat down on the dish. The 
Man-Slaying-Woman came, and asked, “O Eagle! have you not seen a Hare 
of mine, which I wanted to catch?” — *I saw him,’ said the Eagle. He 
passed by, and ran up to the sky. — “Oh, alas! how can I find him now?" The Eagle said, “Take a scat on my back! I will carry you up to the sky. 
Then you may catch the Hare.” — Oh, quick! take me there!” The Eagle 
put out her back, and the Man-Slaying-Woman sat upon it. The Eagle flew 
upwards, and then said to the Man-Slaying-Woman, “Well, now, look down, 
and say whether the earth is far enough away!” The Man-Slaying- Woman 
said, “The earth is vanishing from view.” — “Oh,” said the Eagle, “now hold 
on tight! I am going to turn a litle” She turned her back downwards. 
The Man-Slaying-Woman lost her grip, and fell down, head foremost, to the 
earth, (landing) near the nest of the Eagle. Her head and her whole body 
penetrated into the ground. Only the legs as far as the knees remained out 
of the ground. The Hare dashed out from his hiding-place, seized a stone 
hammer, and hammered with it on the old woman's heels. Then he said to 
the Eagle, “Well, my friend, now these will be good stakes for attaching our 
reindeer to. The end. 
Written down by the cossack Innocent Bereskin, from the words of Mary Chahin, a Russianized Yukaghir woman, in the village of Pokhotsk, on the Lower Kolyma, 1895. 
4. (Raven and She-Fox.)) 
A Raven married a Fox-Woman. They had nothing to eat. The 
Raven said, “Now I am going to the Sea-Spirit.” His wife laughed. “How 
will you find him? — “Oh, I shall, I know the sca!” The Raven flew away, 
TA ule of a somewhat similar character was collected among the Kolyma Chukchee, and published in my Chukehee Materials, p. 128.  

----

194 BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 
and came to the middle of the sea. He sat down on the ice, and saw, down 
in the water under the ice, a large house. It was the house of the Sea- 
Spirit. So he took off his coat and entered the house. The house-master met him with great joy. “So you have come? Who are you? — I am 
the Raven” — “And where is your coat?” — “I left it outside, near the 
house.” — “Bring it here!” The Raven brought it. The Sea-Spirit put it 
on, and asked, “Do I look well in this coat?” — “Oh, quite so! You may 
wear it all the time” — “No!” said the Sea-Spirit. He took off the coat 
and gave it back to the Raven. Now tell me, what is the matter with 
you? — “We have nothing to cat, my wife and I. Give us something!" — 
“All right! Go home!” He came to his wife, and the house was filled with 
ringed seals and spotted seals. Also all kinds of fish, whatsoever fish lives in 
the sea, were there in plenty. The Raven's wife was frightened. “Whence 
came all this abundance?” The Raven said, “Do not be frightened! The Sea-Spirit gave all this to me.” — “Oh, oh! the Sea-Spirit! Have you really 
seen him? — “I saw him in the middle of the sea. He lives in a house 
under the water.” Oh, the Fox was very angry. “You fool! you asked for 
too little. I am going to get more.” — “But you will not act in a proper 
manner.” — “No, I am clever enough.” The Fox ran to the middle of the sea, and saw the house of the Sea- 
Spirit. She took off her coat and entered the house. The Sea-Spirit met 
her with great joy. “Oh, a guest! Who are you? — *I am Fox-Woman." — 
“And where is your coat?” — “I left it outside, near the house.” — *Bring it here!” She brought it. The Sea-Spirit put it on, and asked, “Do I look 
well in this coat?” The Fox laughed aloud, and derided him. The Sea-Spirit 
was very angry. He pushed the Fox out. Then he broke all the ice on 
the sea. The Fox was nearly drowned. She came to the shore utterly 
exhausted. When she came to her husband, the Raven grew very angry. 
“I told you so,” said he. *Now everything has vanished, and we have nothing 
to eat” They suffered hunger worse than before. The Raven orice more flew 
to the middle of the sea and found the Sea-Spirit. This time the Sea-Spirit 
was so angry, he did not want even to talk to him. The Raven stood near 
the entrance, and said, *I have come.” — “What do you want?" The Raven 
said with great sorrow, *O Sea-Spirit! I have lost everything you gave me, 
and now we are suffering hunger. Give us something, howsoever small!” 
The Sea-Spirit laughed aloud, and relented. “Ah, you are suffering! And 
where is your coat?” — “It is outside, near the house.” — “Bring it here!” 
The Raven brought it, and the Sea-Spirit put it on. “Do I look well in this 
coat?” — “Oh, quite so! You may wear it all the time” — “I will” He 
took the coat for himself. Then he asked, “What do you want from me?” — 
“I want herds of reindeer and herds of mountain-sheep” — “Go home! You 
shall have them all.”

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 195 
The Raven came home, and saw near his house large reindeer-herds with 
many herdsmen. They greeted him, and said, “You have come, O master!” 
1 am not your master at all, I am too poor for that” — “But the Sea- 
Spirit has sent all these herds and herdsmen to be under your hand.” — “All 
ight!” They lived there, the Raven without a coat, and the Fox, who had 
been nearly drowned. They ate of the best meat, and were quite wealthy. 
Then the Fox brought forth two children, — a son and a daughter. They 
felt so much joy, they died from it. That is the end.    
Written down by Peter Korkin, a Russianized Yukaghir, in the village of Pokhotsk on the Lower Kolyma, 189s. 
5. (The Boy who married the Sun.) 
A man lived in a Maritime settlement. He had seven grown-up sons. 
They were travelling in a boat, and hunting whales and walruses. One time 
they went to sea, and saw a large overhanging cliff, quite similar to a house. 
At that moment the boat capsized, and they were drowned. Their mother 
was left quite destitute, with the youngest son, who was still a small boy. 
The boy cried all the time, and asked his mother for food. She gathered 
some shells and seaweed on the shore, and with these she fed the boy; but 
he continued to cry, and to ask for whale-skin and walrus-blubber such as 
he was accustomed to. The mother also cried, “Where shall we find them? 
Your father is gone, and your brothers are also gone” He said, “Then I 
will go and find them.” — “How can you find them? They are drowned 
in the sea.” . The boy went away without his mother's knowledge, and walked along 
the shore. At last he came to that clifthouse. He entered it, and saw his 
father and his seven brothers sitting there. The father wept. . “Why have 
you come? We are dead, drowned.” A CliffSpirit was there also. He was 
very angry. “Why have you come? said the Spirit, and gave the boy a 
tremendous thrashing, so that he was left hardly alive. The father helped 
him to get up, and led him out of the house. He gave him also three small 
roots, and said, “When you reach home, put one of these roots into each of 
our caches. Then in the morning send your mother to look into the caches.” 
The boy came home, and first of all he went to the caches, and put into 
each of them one root of those given to him by his father. Then he came 
to the mother. The mother was weeping. “Where have you been, and who 
has beaten you so frightfully?” — “I saw my father and my seven brothers.” — 
“Do not say so! Your father and your brothers perished long ago.” Weeping, 
she fell asleep. In the morning he awakened her, and said, “O mother! go 
and open the three caches, and then bring some food from there!” The 
mother thought, *What shall I bring? There is nothing in them.” Notwith- 
25--JESUP NORTH PACIFIC BXFPED. VOL. VII.

----

196 . BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES, 
standing, she went to the caches and opened them. All the caches were 
full of provisions, — whale-skin and white-whale blubber and walrus-meat and 
everything as it was in the time when her husband and her seven sons were 
alive. The boy said, “Now, mother, we have plenty of food: so I will go 
and look for a wife.” — “Where will you find her, child?” — “I shall” He 
got up about midnight, put on his clothes and boots, and departed. He 
looked up toward the sky, and saw two men descending directly toward him. 
“Where are you going? What do you want?” — “I am going to look for 
a wife” — “All right! Then drive these reindeer of ours, and follow our 
trail. The way we descended, that way you ascend.” He sat down on the 
sledge and drove upwards along the moon's ray. He felt much fear; never- 
theless he drove straight ahead, and came to the heavens. The heavens 
looked like firm ground, only it was quite white and shining. He saw a 
Raven, that flew by. “What do you want here? Oh, well! I know. Stay 
a litle! I will tell you. You will find on the way a settlement of Reindeer 
people. Do not stop there. Then you will find another settlement of Rein- 
deer people. Do not ‘stop there, either. Also pass by the third settlement. 
Then you will see a large house, shining like gold. This is the house of 
the Sun. His daughter is quite ill. She is near unto death, and nobody 
knows how to help her. The Sun will greet you with great joy. He will 
say, Oh, it is a man from the Lower World! Can you not help my daughter? 
I will give you a rich reward.’ Then say, ‘I do not want your reward; but 
1 will help, if you will consent to give me your daughter for a wife. The 
Sun will think, ‘She is dying. It is better to have her live and marry this 
stranger. Then he will consent to your request. At the same time I will 
sit upon the roof. Enter the room, and look out of the window upon the 
roof. I will open my beak and take in three heavy breaths. Then do the 
same! Take three long breaths and let the air of them touch the girl. 
Then she will recover.” 
The young man came to that house, and fell backward, dazed by its 
mere brightness, The Sun ified him from the ground, and said, “Do not 
be afraid! Since you came from the Lower World, help my daughter, who 
isilll I will give you a rich reward.” The boy answered, “I want no reward. 
Rather promise to let me marry your daughter!” The Sun thought to him- 
self, ‘Better that than to have her dead!’ So he gave the promise. The 
young man looked out of the window. A Raven was sitting on the roof. 
The Raven opened his beak and drew in three breaths. He also drew three 
breaths. The air touched the girl, and she recovered. She looked as if just 
awakened from deep slumber. She asked for meat and drink, and they gave 
them to her. After that they married her to the visitor. In a few days the 
father-inaw said, “You have a country of your own. Go there to your 
mother!” The Sun said also, *On the way you will pass three settlements

----

BOGORAS, CHUKCHEE TALES. 197 
with large herds of reindeer. Tell them to follow you. I give them to you.” 
He came to the settlements, and said as he had been told. “All right” they 
answered; and when he looked back, it seemed as if the whole land was 
moving around, so numerous were the reindeer and the herdsmen. About 
midnight they came to his mother. Oh, she felt much joy! The young 
man’s wife entered the house, and said, “Oh, this house is too bad! How 
could we live in a house like this?” — We cannot help it,” said her husband. 
“This is our only house.” She went out, and took from her bosom a golder egg. She threw the egg into the brook, and there was a big golden house. 
“Now,” said the woman, “this is a house fit for us to live in.” They lived in the house. Their mother wondered greatly, and from thus wondering she died 
in three days. The poor people used to come to them from all directions, 
and they slaughtered reindeer for every one. Thus they lived in afluence 
and grew numerous.’ 
Told by Mary Alin, a Russianized Chuvantzy woman, in the village of Markova, on the Middle Anadyr, 1go1. 
  
? The episode of the golden house certainly does not belong to Chukchee folklore. Stl in several tales collected among the Chukchee similar episodes are met with.

----

